---
layout: post
title: JavaScript Developer Survey Results 
author: Alex Young 
categories: 
- community
- surveys
---

Our JavaScript developer survey has now closed.  We had 151 responses in total from a broad range of developers.

Downloads of the results are available here:

* "Summary PDF":/files/DailyJS_Survey.pdf
* "Data CSV":/files/DailyJS_Survey.csv

h3. Results

We found that 68% of respondents do not currently unit test their JavaScript.  We'll write a few tutorials on this subject soon in case people are finding it hard to get started with testing.

Those that unit tested preferred newer frameworks like RSpec and Screw.Unit.  It's worth noting that these are projects that Ruby programmers will be familiar with, and 76% of respondents selected Ruby as a primary development language.

Minifiers were also popular, with YUI Compressor scoring 67%.

GitHub was cited as the primary choice for project discovery, beating even "reddit":http://www.reddit.com/ and "Hacker News":http://news.ycombinator.com/.  GitHub was also the most popular code hosting site.

37% of respondents use Google for hosting libraries.  "Amazon CloudFront":http://aws.amazon.com/cloudfront/ and "Rackspace's Cloud Files":http://www.rackspacecloud.com/cloud_hosting_products/files were also mentioned.

v8 won in the server-side/desktop scripting category.  I find this interesting because Rhino was "traditionally" the way people seemed to do this.  It could be just that our readers are awesomely up to date!
