---
layout: post
title: "jQuery Plugin Roundup: Ketchup, Quicksand, Fitted"
author: Alex Young 
categories: 
- jquery
- plugins
---

Welcome to the jQuery Plugin Roundup, episode 2.  Remember you can send your plugins in for review through our "contact form":/contact.html or "@dailyjs":http://twitter.com/dailyjs.

h3. Ketchup - Simple Form Validation

"Ketchup":http://demos.usejquery.com/ketchup-plugin/ provides lots of useful form validations using the <code>class</code> attribute on <code>input</code> elements.  For example:

{% highlight html %}
<div>
  <label for="ex1_username">Username</label>
  <input type="text" id="ex1_username" class="validate(required, username)" />
</div>
{% endhighlight %}

Validations can be combined like this:

{% highlight html %}
<input type="text" class="validate(required, username, rangelength(3,20))" />
{% endhighlight %}

Visit "ketchup-plugin on GitHub":http://github.com/mustardamus/ketchup-plugin to download.

h3. Quicksand - Reordering and Filtering

"Quicksand":http://razorjack.net/quicksand/ lets you reorder and shuffle items with a cool animated effect.  I have a feeling this will work particularly well for mobile webkit web apps.

Usage looks like this:

{% highlight javascript %}
$("#content").quicksand($("#data > li"), {
		duration: 1000,
		easing: "easeInOutQuad",
		attribute: "data-id",
	}
);
{% endhighlight %}

Visit "quicksand on GitHub":http://github.com/razorjack/quicksand/ to download.

h3. Fitted - Clickable Content Blocks

"Fitted":http://www.trovster.com/lab/plugins/fitted/ is a simple plugin for making a container clickable.  This is useful when you've got quote or abstract that links to full content.

Usage is simple: <code>$('.clickable_class').fitted();</code>
