---
layout: post
title: "jQuery Roundup: jQuery BBQ, blockUI"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- jquery
- plugins
- ui
---

Welcome to the jQuery roundup 38. You can send your plugins and articles in for review through our "contact form":/contact.html or "@dailyjs":http://twitter.com/dailyjs.

h3. jQuery Community Updates for December

Addy Osmani has posted the "jQuery Community Updates for December":http://blog.jquery.com/2010/12/28/jquery-community-updates-for-december-2010/ to the jQuery blog.  There are details on preparations for jQuery 1.5, which features a major overhaul of the <code>jQuery.ajax</code> code and API.

h3. jQuery BBQ

"jQuery BBQ":https://github.com/cowboy/jquery-bbq (MIT and GPL licenses) by Ben Alman helps manage bookmarkable #hash history.  There's a "project page", "unit tests":https://github.com/cowboy/jquery-bbq/tree/master/unit, and "lots of examples":http://benalman.com/code/projects/jquery-bbq/examples/fragment-basic/.

This plugin can cope with multiple history states per page, as demonstrated in the "advanced example":http://benalman.com/code/projects/jquery-bbq/examples/fragment-advanced/.

h3. jQuery History Plugin

"jQuery History Plugin":https://github.com/tkyk/jquery-history-plugin by Mikage Sawatari and Takayuki Miwa is another <code>hashchange</code> event-based history plugin.  The API is slightly different to jQuery BBQ, using the <code>$.history.init()</code> and <code>$.history.load()</code> methods to work with history.

h3. blockUI

"blockUI":http://jquery.malsup.com/block/ ("GitHub: malsup / blockui":https://github.com/malsup/blockui/) by Mike Alsup allows you to block interactions with a page until asynchronous events have completed.  It fades the page and shows a message, but it also sets the mouse cursor to a suitable busy icon.  

This example makes a nice rounded-corner style display:

{% highlight javascript %}
$(document).ready(function() { 
  $('#demo2').click(function() { 
    $.blockUI({ css: { 
      border: 'none', 
      padding: '15px', 
      backgroundColor: '#000', 
      '-webkit-border-radius': '10px', 
      '-moz-border-radius': '10px', 
      opacity: .5, 
      color: '#fff' 
    } }); 

    setTimeout($.unblockUI, 2000); 
  });
});
{% endhighlight %}

