---
layout: post
title: "Node Roundup"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- node
- server
- libraries
- events
---

Welcome to the Node Roundup. Send in your apps and libraries using our "contact form":/contact.html or "@dailyjs":http://twitter.com/dailyjs.

h3. Node 0.2.5 and 0.3.1 Released

"Node 0.2.5":http://groups.google.com/group/nodejs/browse_thread/thread/329e43c54e70675e and "0.3.1":http://groups.google.com/group/nodejs/browse_thread/thread/807b802ed01d8721 have been released.  In case you're confused about 0.3.1, it's considered unstable, so it might not work with all of your favourite libraries.

A new configure option, <code>--profile</code>, has been added to both branches, which enables gprof profiling.  This can be used to benchmark Node using the gprof tool, which you probably have installed as part of your build environment.

Most of the other changes relate to playing better with the operating system, or network/buffering stability.

h3. Node.js Camp

"Node.js Camp":http://camp.nodejs.org is a Node workshop in San Francisco:

bq. Line up of speakers and contributors includes Ryan Dahl, Isaac Schlueter, Tim Caswell, Guillermo Rauch, Paul Querna, Matt Ranney, Mikeal Rogers and more!

This looks like a pretty amazing event to me, and the tickets start at $35 (before 30th Nov)!  They're also planning a global tour, so I'll let you know what else they announce.

h3. Expose JavaScript Objects to the Web

I noticed this little Node/Connect script that exposes JavaScript objects to the web: "gist: 700995":https://gist.github.com/700995

<script src="https://gist.github.com/700995.js?file=webapp.js"></script>

This script was created by "Visnu Pitiyanuvath":http://visnup.com/ in response to an "earlier Ruby/Rack script":https://gist.github.com/675667.

h3. GlobTrie

"GlobTrie":https://github.com/rbranson/glob-trie.js by Rick Branson is a highly optimized Node script for pattern matching strings:

bq. It breaks down the pattern matchers into pieces and organizes them in a Trie (prefix search tree) structure, allowing them to be searched in roughly logarithmic time, versus linear time for just an array of regular expressions, for instance.

The currently supported pattern matchers are limited, modelled after file path matching.  However, the performance of this library destroys JavaScript regular expressions, according to the author's benchmarks, so Branson could be onto something interesting.


