---
layout: post
title: "Dust, TDD, UKI"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- templates
- testing
- frameworks
---

h3. Dust

"Dust":http://akdubya.github.com/dustjs/ ("License":http://github.com/akdubya/dustjs/blob/master/LICENSE, "code":http://github.com/akdubya/dustjs/) by Aleksander Williams is an asynchronous templating engine based on Mustache that works with Node or browsers.  The syntax is markup-like, and it offers features to allow "safe" templates, so admin area editable templates should be possible in a CMS/blog project.

Data can be streamed to templates, which might be useful for building MVC-like encapsulation in a data-heavy web app.  The interactive examples on "Dust's documentation pages":http://akdubya.github.com/dustjs/ demonstrate this in detail.

h3. TDD and Magic Unicorns

In "Test driven development at Transloadit":http://debuggable.com/posts/test-driven-development-at-transloadit:4cc892a7-b9fc-4d65-bb0c-1b27cbdd56cb, Felix Geisendörfer discusses test-driven development at Transloadit, for a large Node-based project.  He talks about dealing with the difficulties of using bleeding edge libraries and maintaining a TDD discipline.

It's a well-written high-level article that talks about TDD in a professional context.

h3. Zepto.js Presentation

Good old madrobby published "a presentation":http://mir.aculo.us/2010/10/28/zepto-js-a-jquery-compatible-mobile-javascript-framework-in-2k-presentation/ about his framework, Zepto.js.  The "hacker news post":http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=1843130 had some interesting discussion, with responses from Fuchs.

h3. UKI

I was at the "London JavaScript Meetup Group":http://www.meetup.com/javascript-3/ last night, which had presentations on Ext.js.  "Roland Swingler":http://twitter.com/knaveofdiamonds gave an interesting talk about the basics of Ext.js, and how it worked in an administration area he's been working on for his day job.

After the talk someone asked me if I'd seen "UKI":http://ukijs.org/ before, which is a similar project.  It's cross-browser and has some screencasts to quickly get you up to speed.  There's some great examples, especially the "100 line Wave layout demo":http://ukijs.org/examples/core-examples/wave/.
