---
layout: post
title: "Let's Make a Framework: Chaining Events"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- frameworks
- tutorials
- lmaf
---

Welcome to part 29 of _Let's Make a Framework_, the ongoing series about building a JavaScript framework.

If you haven't been following along, these articles are tagged with "lmaf":http://dailyjs.com/tags.html#lmaf.  The project we're creating is called "Turing":http://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js.

"Last week":http://dailyjs.com/2010/09/02/framework-part-28/ I demonstrated a jQuery-like API for working with DOM finders.  This week we'll build on that to add event support.

h3. API Design

We want to be able to do this:

{% highlight javascript %}
turing('#element').bind('click', function(e) {
  alert('Stop clicking me!');
});
{% endhighlight %}

If you haven't read the other chaining tutorials, this might not seem interesting.  The reason we're doing this is to get a chainable API for DOM finders, like jQuery.  So multiple finders could be called:

{% highlight javascript %}
turing('#element').find('.element li a').bind('click', function(e) {
  alert('Stop clicking me!');
});
{% endhighlight %}

Adding events with Turing is performed with <code>turing.events.add(element, 'event name', callback)</code>.  I'll use the method name <code>bind</code> instead of <code>add</code> so it doesn't look confusing next to DOM-manipulation code.

h3. Test

We need this test to pass (in "test/events_test.js":http://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js/blob/master/test/events_test.js):

{% highlight javascript %}
should('bind events using the chained API', function() {
  var clicks = 0;
  turing('#events-test a').bind('click', function() { clicks++; });
  turing.events.fire(element, 'click');
  return clicks;
}).equals(1);
{% endhighlight %}

Running it right now results in an error: 

bq. *should bind events using the chained API*: 1 does not equal: TypeError: Result of expression 'turing('#events-test a').bind' [undefined] is not a function.

h3. Implementation

It seems like we can just alias <code>bind</code> to <code>add</code> with a bit of currying, but that doesn't fit with our style of keeping each module independent (else <code>turing.dom</code> will rely on <code>turing.events</code>).

However, last week I exposed the object that is returned through the chained DOM calls: <code>turing.domChain</code>.  Let's try extending that from the events API if it's available.

In "turing.events.js":http://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js/blob/master/turing.events.js:

{% highlight javascript %}
events.addDOMethods = function() {
  // If there's no domChain then the DOM module hasn't been included
  if (typeof turing.domChain === 'undefined') return;

  // Else it's safe to add the bind method
  turing.domChain.bind = function(type, handler) {
    var element = this.first();
    if (element) {
      turing.events.add(element, type, handler);

      // NOTE: "this" refers to the current domChain object,
      //       which contains the stack of elements
      return this;
    }
  };
};

// It's safe to always run addDOMethods when
// the events module is loaded
events.addDOMethods();
{% endhighlight %}

I've commented each part, but it's fairly straightforward.

h3. Building

What's interesting about this approach is that <code>events.addDOMethods</code> is not private.  People could include scripts in any order, and get the functionality as long as they call <code>turing.events.addDOMethods()</code>.

Obviously load order is important here, so the script that "builds" Turing into a single file ("Jakefile":http://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js/blob/master/Jakefile) should be aware that "turing.dom.js":http://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js/blob/master/turing.dom.js should come before "turing.events.js":http://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js/blob/master/turing.events.js:

{% highlight javascript %}
jake.task('concat', function(t) {
  var output = '',
      files = ('turing.core.js turing.oo.js turing.enumerable.js '
              + 'turing.functional.js turing.dom.js turing.events.js turing.alias.js turing.anim.js').split(' ')
{% endhighlight %}

I've written each module name by hand in the correct order, rather than reading the file list from the file system.

h3. Conclusion

Adding events support to our chainable DOM API was easier than I expected.  This could be expanded on with aliases to make it more user-friendly (jQuery makes using events more intuitive through aliases).


