---
layout: post
title: "Jade, Smokescreen, Drawing with HTML5"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- graphics
- animation
- haml
---

h3. Jade

TJ Holowaychuk announced a new project yesterday called "Jade":http://jade-lang.com/ -- a new template engine for "node":http://nodejs.org/ that focuses on readability, error handling, and performance.

It looks like this:

{% highlight javascript %}
!!! 5
html(lang="en")
  head
    title= pageTitle
    :javascript
      | if (foo) {
      |    bar()
      | }
  body
    h1 Jade - node template engine
    #container
      - if (youAreUsingJade)
        p You are amazing
      - else
        p Get on it!
{% endhighlight %}

TJ wanted to improve on "Haml":http://haml-lang.com/'s syntax, and felt like existing template engines were hard to debug.  His post refers to Jade as "a Haml killer":http://tjholowaychuk.com/post/759178288/jade-haml-killer-for-nodejs, which should garner it some attention.

The guts of Jade are the tokenizer, which generates tokens complete with line number for detailed debugging.  You can have a read through the source in "jade.js":http://github.com/visionmedia/jade/blob/master/lib/jade.js.

h3. Smokescreen

"Smokescreen":http://smokescreen.us/ promises to translate Flash to HTML and will be open source at some point in the near future.  I don't know if they're involved with "Gordon":http://wiki.github.com/tobeytailor/gordon/, but they appear to be pitching it at designers who won't want to migrate away from Adobe's creative tools.

h3. Drawing with JavaScript in HTML5 vs ActionScript 3 in Flash

"Drawing with JavaScript in HTML5 vs ActionScript 3 in Flash":http://www.williammalone.com/articles/flash-vs-html5-canvas-drawing/ by William Malone demonstrates creating a logo with JavaScript and the canvas tag, then compares it to ActionScript 3.

The code examples are side by side, so you can see how similar they are which is interesting if you're a hardcore JavaScript anti-Flash cheerleader but have never actually worked with ActionScript.
