---
layout: post
title: "Node Roundup"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- node
- server
- twitter
---

Welcome to the Node Roundup. Send in your apps and libraries using our "contact form":/contact.html or "@dailyjs":http://twitter.com/dailyjs.

h3. Streamie

"Streamie":http://github.com/cramforce/streamie ("try Streamie here":http://streamie.org/) by Malte Ubl is a Twitter client implemented with Node -- the source is released under a "Simplified BSD License":http://github.com/cramforce/streamie/blob/master/LICENSE.  The author has tried to make the project as cutting edge as possible, using HTML5 and CSS3.  He has also written a great blog post detailing how to get started hacking your own version: "I just forked a running website: Streamie.org":http://www.nonblocking.io/2010/08/future-is-here-i-just-forked-running.html.

The project uses lots of other interesting things, like Less.js, Require.js, and Socket.IO.

h3. daemon.node

"daemon.node":http://github.com/Slashed/daemon.node is a Node module for creating daemons.  The author also wrote a blog post, "Writing Daemons in Javascript with node.JS":http://slashed.posterous.com/writing-daemons-in-javascript-with-nodejs-0 which is informative if you haven't done that sort of thing before.  The process is similar to most languages, and in this instance the module is implemented in C++.

h3. node-video

"node-video":http://github.com/pkrumins/node-video by Peteris Krumins is a module for encoding Theora/Ogg videos from RGB buffers.  The author said the following on his blog, "catonmat.net":http://www.catonmat.net/:

bq. I wrote this module for my StackVM startup so that anyone could record virtual machine video screencasts. See StackVM demo video #1 at around 1min 23secs, where I demo this module in action.


