---
layout: post
title: "Geddy"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- nodejs
- frameworks
- libraries
---

"Geddy":http://geddyjs.org/ is a web framework for Node by "Matthew Eernisse":http://fleegix.org/ inspired by larger web frameworks like Rails.  It has a command line application which can be used to build and run apps.  It supports routing, with Rails-style resources.

h3. Installation

The author currently recommends using version 0.1.94 of Node, so upgrade if necessary.

{% highlight sh %}
git clone git://github.com/mde/geddy.git
cd geddy
make
sudo make install
{% endhighlight %}

h3. App Configuration

An app can be generated with <code>geddy-gen app app-name</code>.  This will create an app template files, much like Rails.  Then all you need to do is edit <code>config/environments/development.js</code> to include database config, and you can generate resources with <code>geddy-gen resource resource-name</code>.

The configuration file should have an example database config commented out.  There are more examples here: "The two-minute Geddy app":http://wiki.github.com/mde/geddy/the-two-minute-geddy-app.

h3. Issues

I ran into problems building node-sqlite for the current version of Node.  The "version on GitHub":http://github.com/grumdrig/node-sqlite seems newer than the one on Google Code, but I can't get Geddy to work with it.  Because Node changed a lot over the last few months, I assume the sqlite library hasn't caught up yet.

h3. Future

The "author mentions":http://fleegix.org/articles/2010-04-26-geddy-models-validations-for-node-js that the project is being used commercially at "Yammer":https://www.yammer.com/, so hopefully work will continue and the project won't be left idle like so many Node frameworks.

Geddy is based around resources, so it will save a lot of time when building many types of apps and APIs.  This framework will appeal to Rails developers, it could be a good way of attracting Rails developers to Node.  Success will be purely down to keeping up with Node's changes and making installation as easy as possible.
