---
layout: post
title: "Let's Make a Framework: Ajax Part 2"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- frameworks
- tutorials
- ajax
- lmaf
---

Welcome to part 14 of _Let's Make a Framework_, the ongoing series about building a JavaScript framework.  This part continues discussing Ajax.

If you haven't been following along, these articles are tagged with "lmaf":http://dailyjs.com/tags.html#lmaf.  The project we're creating is called Turing and is available on GitHub: "turing.js":http://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js/.

h3. Cross-Domain Requests

Cross-domain requests are useful because they can be used to fetch data from services like Twitter.  This is now a popular technique, despite feeling clunky to implement.  This is another case where lack of browser features can be patched by JavaScript.

h3. Implementations in the Wild

The "Glow":http://www.bbc.co.uk/glow/ framework has <code>glow.net.xDomainGet</code> and <code>glow.net.loadScript</code>.  These are similar, but place different requirements on the server.  What <code>loadScript</code> does is called JSONP.  jQuery also implements JSONP, and has this to say in the documentation:

bq. The jsonp type appends a query string parameter of callback=? to the URL. The server should prepend the JSON data with the callback name to form a valid JSONP response. We can specify a parameter name other than callback with the jsonp option to $.ajax().

A JSONP URL looks like this:

<code>http://feeds.delicious.com/v1/json/alex_young/javascript?callback=parseJSON</code>

The reason a callback is specified in the URL is the cross-domain Ajax works by loading remote JavaScript by inserting <code>script</code> tags, and then interpreting the results.  The term JSONP comes from _JSON with Padding_, and originated in "Remote JSON - JSONP":http://bob.pythonmac.org/archives/2005/12/05/remote-json-jsonp/ by Bob Ippolito.

h3. The Algorithm

JSONP works like this:

# The framework transparently creates a callback for this specific request
# A script tag is inserted into a document.  This is of course invisible to the user
# The <code>src</code> attribute is set to <code>http://example.com/json?callback=jsonpCallback
# The server generates a response
# The server wraps its JSON response like this: <code>jsonpCallback({ ... })</code>
# Once the script has loaded, the callback is called, and the client code can process the JSON accordingly
# Finally, the callback and <code>script</code> tags are removed

As you can see, servers have to be compliant with this technique -- you can't use it to fetch arbitrary JSON or XML.

h3. API Design

I've based this on the Glow framework, and the option names are consistent with the other <code>turing.net</code> code:

{% highlight javascript %}
turing.net.jsonp('http://feeds.delicious.com/v1/json/alex_young/javascript?callback={callback}', {
  success: function(json) {
    console.log(json);
  }
});
{% endhighlight %}

The <code>{callback}</code> string must be specified -- it gets replaced by the framework transparently.

h3. Implementation

To create a callback, no clever meta-programming is required.  It's sufficient to create a function and assign as a property on <code>window</code>:

{% highlight javascript %}
methodName = '__turing_jsonp_' + parseInt(new Date().getTime());
window[methodName] = function() { /* callback */ };
{% endhighlight %}

A <code>script</code> tag is created and destroyed as well:

{% highlight javascript %}
scriptTag = document.createElement('script');
scriptTag.id = methodName;

// Replacing the request URL with our internal callback wrapper
scriptTag.src = url.replace('{callback}', methodName);
document.body.appendChild(scriptTag);

// The callback should delete the script tag after the client's callback has completed
document.body.removeChild(scriptTag)
{% endhighlight %}

That's practically all there is to it.  You can see the real implementation in "turing.net.js":http://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js/blob/master/turing.net.js by searching for <code>JSONPCallback</code>.

h3. Conclusion

Although JSONP requires server support, a wide variety of interesting services support it.  This simple technique has made cross-domain requests popular -- how many blogs and sites now feature live Twitter feeds written with pure JavaScript?

