---
layout: post
title: "Node Roundup"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- node
- server
- logging
- databases
- competitions
---

Welcome to the Node Roundup. Send in your apps and libraries using our "contact form":/contact.html or "@dailyjs":http://twitter.com/dailyjs.

h3. Lodge

"Lodge":http://github.com/kordless/lodge is a HTTP to syslog proxy by Kord Campbell.  Logging to Lodge is straightforward:

{% highlight sh %}
curl -d "127.0.0.1 - all work and no play makes Jack a dull boy" https://localhost/inputs/d00dadc0ffee
{% endhighlight %}

It's a fairly simple little script, and can work with Syslog-NG.  Campbell has written up a detailed blog post with some useful examples in "Lodge: A HTTP to Syslog Proxy with Node.js":http://www.loggly.com/2010/09/http-to-syslog-proxy-with-node-js/.

h3. Node.js and MongoDB

I noticed "Node.js and MongoDB":http://howtonode.org/ac1872f596600b7b8493658da9b19c9b7e0b3f34/node-and-mongo on _How to Node_ which is a brief roundup of popular "MongoDB":http://www.mongodb.org/ libraries for Node.  The issue of indentation is mentioned in reference to the "mongodb-node-native":http://github.com/christkv/node-mongodb-native library, which "Mongoose":http://www.learnboost.com/mongoose/ attempts to solve.

My personal projects have been mongodb-node-native so far, with my own wrappers to cut down syntax.  I haven't actually used Mongoose in anger still, but it might be time to switch.

h3. Which database best fits node.js?

"Which database best fits node.js":http://groups.google.com/group/nodejs/browse_thread/thread/d571f5fda41fcc63/8fb3934cd13e088c?pli=1 is a thread on the "nodejs mailing list":http://groups.google.com/group/nodejs/.  In it people voice their support for various SQL and NoSQL databases.

I recently predicted that if you wrote a blog post containing references to NoSQL, benchmarks, and Node, the traffic from "Hackernews":http://news.ycombinator.com/ would turn your server into a blazing pile of slag.  It's a hot topic, mainly because there's suddenly so many good database options out there.  I've had a lot of luck with MongoDB and Node, how about you?

h3. Node Knockout Winners

The "Node Knockout Winners":http://nodeknockout.posterous.com/and-the-winners-are were announced earlier this month.  "Swarmation":http://swarmation.com/ was the overall winner, which I had a lot of fun playing with.

The "JS1k":http://js1k.com/ contest has also finished.  The winner will be announced at JSConf EU, which is on the 25th and 26th of September.

