---
layout: post
title: "Let's Make a Framework: Animations"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- frameworks
- tutorials
- animation
- lmaf
---

Welcome to part 15 of _Let's Make a Framework_, the ongoing series about building a JavaScript framework.  This part starts looking at JavaScript animations.

If you haven't been following along, these articles are tagged with "lmaf":http://dailyjs.com/tags.html#lmaf.  The project we're creating is called Turing and is available on GitHub: "turing.js":http://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js/.

h3. JavaScript Animation

JavaScript animation libraries are usually comprised of the following elements:

* Methods to work with CSS properties and animate them
* A queuing system, for scheduling animations, and animating each "frame"
* CSS colour parsing
* Helpers that make common web effects easy to use alongside events

h3. Animation Frameworks

One of the first popular libraries that addressed animation was "script.aculo.us":http://script.aculo.us/.  The "effects.js":http://github.com/madrobby/scriptaculous/blob/master/src/effects.js script offered many pre-baked effects that developers wanted to use on their sites, and transition effects like <code>Effect.Highlight</code>, <code>Effect.Appear</code> and <code>Effect.BlindDown</code> quickly became popular.  These effects are built using some JavaScript logic to manipulate CSS properties.

The script.aculo.us API is based around instantiated objects:

{% highlight javascript %}
new Effect.EffectName(element, required parameters, [options]);
{% endhighlight %}

Most effects take a <code>duration</code>, <code>from</code> and <code>to</code> parameter:

{% highlight javascript %}
new Effect.Opacity('element', { 
  duration: 2.0,
  transition: Effect.Transitions.linear,
  from: 1.0, 
  to: 0.5
});
{% endhighlight %}

The <code>transition</code> option refers to a control function that determines the rate of change.

"MooTools":http://mootools.net/ has a similar API in its "Fx":http://mootools.net/docs/core/Fx/Fx module:

{% highlight javascript %}
new Fx.Reveal($('element'), { duration: 500, mode: 'horizontal' });
{% endhighlight %}

Shortcuts can be added to the <code>Element</code> class as well:

{% highlight javascript %}
$('element').reveal({ duration: 500, mode: 'horizontal' });
{% endhighlight %}

jQuery provides another animation API with helpers and CSS property manipulation.  jQuery UI and other plugins build or extend this functionality.  The main method is "animate()":http://api.jquery.com/animate/ which accepts properties to animate, duration, easing function and a termination callback.  Most tasks can be completed with the helpers.

The nice thing about jQuery's animation API is it's very easy to create sequences of animations -- just chain a list of calls:

{% highlight javascript %}
$('#element').slideUp(300).delay(800).fadeIn(400);
{% endhighlight %}

jQuery builds a queue to create these animation sequences.  The "queue":http://api.jquery.com/queue/ documentation has an example that demonstrates how a queue is built up based on the animation call order and durations.

The Glow framework builds a set of helper methods for common animation tasks from a core animation class called "glow.anim.Animation":http://www.bbc.co.uk/glow/docs/1.7/api/glow.anim.animation.shtml.  This can be combined with "glow.anim.Timeline":http://www.bbc.co.uk/glow/docs/1.7/furtherinfo/animtimeline/ to create complex animations.

h3. Queues and Events

Animation frameworks usually use <code>setInterval</code> and <code>clearInterval</code> interval to sequence events.  This can be combined with custom events.  Due to JavaScript's single-threaded environment, <code>setInterval</code> and events are the best way of managing the asynchronous nature of animations.

h3. Animation Basics

As we've seen, animation frameworks build on top of CSS property manipulation.  At its most basic, animation looks like this:

{% highlight javascript %}
// Box CSS: #box { background-color: red; width: 20px; height: 20px; position: absolute; left: 0; top: 10 }

function animate() {
  var box = document.getElementById('box'),
      duration = 1000,
      start = (new Date).valueOf(),
      finish = start + duration,
      interval;

  interval = setInterval(function() {
    var time = (new Date).valueOf(), frame = time > finish ? 1 : (time - start) / duration;

    // The thing being animated
    box.style.left = frame * 100 + 'px';

    if (time > finish) {
      clearInterval(interval);
    }
  }, 10);
}
{% endhighlight %}

I based this code on "emile.js":http://github.com/madrobby/emile/blob/master/emile.js.  It uses <code>setInterval</code> which calls a function every few milliseconds.  Time calculations (based on the number of milliseconds returned by <code>new Date</code>) are used to set up the animation and stop it.  Once the end of the animation has been reached, <code>clearInterval</code> is called.

This is essentially what jQuery's animation library does with its queues.

h3. Next Week

Next week I'll expand on this code to start the basis of an animation library.

h3. References

* "emile.js":http://github.com/madrobby/emile/blob/master/emile.js
* "Getting Started with Emile":http://dailyjs.com/2010/02/17/getting-started-with-emile/
* "Scriptaculous Wiki":http://wiki.github.com/madrobby/scriptaculous/core-effects
* "Scriptaculous effects.js":http://github.com/madrobby/scriptaculous/blob/master/src/effects.js
* "Glow's anim.js":http://github.com/glow/glow1/blob/master/src/anim/anim.js
* "Glow's animtimeline example":http://www.bbc.co.uk/glow/docs/1.7/furtherinfo/animtimeline/
* "MooTools' Fx":http://mootools.net/docs/more/Fx/Fx.Elements
* "jQuery's effects.js":http://github.com/jquery/jquery/blob/master/src/effects.js

