---
layout: post
title: "Node Roundup"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- node
- server
- database
- postgres
- mail
- time
---

Welcome to the Node Roundup. Send in your apps and libraries using our "contact form":/contact.html or "@dailyjs":http://twitter.com/dailyjs.

h3. node-postgres

bq. Non-blocking (async) JavaScript PostgreSQL client for node.js written fully TDD and with lots of love.

"node-postgres":https://github.com/brianc/node-postgres is a non-blocking "PostgreSQL":http://www.postgresql.org/ client library released under the MIT license by Brian Carlson.

Carlson has been working hard to have high test coverage, and he's running his tests on Ubuntu and Mac OS.  He's currently working hard to get the wiki documentation up to speed, as well as date coercion working correctly.  The library currently supports prepared statements, query caching, and notification messages.

Usage currently looks like this:

{% highlight javascript %}
var Client = require('node-postgres').Client;
var client = new Client({
  user:     'user',
  database: 'test',
  password: 'pass'  //plaintext or md5 supported
});

client.connect();

var printRow = function(row) {
  console.log(row.fields);
};

var simpleQuery = client.query("select * from user where heart = 'big'");
simpleQuery.on('row', printRow);
{% endhighlight %}

h3. node-zoneinfo

"node-zoneinfo":https://github.com/billywhizz/node-zoneinfo by "Andrew Johnston":http://blog.beardsoft.com/ is a library for dealing with "tz database":http://www.twinsun.com/tz/tz-link.htm files.  These databaes are used to determine time zone with UTC offsets and daylight saving.

The author is attempting to convert between different timezones using this library, so if you're doing something similar it might be worth checking out.

A similar library is "timezone-js":https://github.com/mde/timezone-js by Matthew Eernisse.  He gives examples with Rhino (I haven't tried it with Node).

h3. mailparser

"mailparser":https://github.com/andris9/mailparser (BSD license) by Andris Reinman is an asynchronous and non-blocking parser for node.js to parse mime encoded e-mail messages.  It can handle large attachments by parsing them in chunks.  A bit of mime email knowledge is required to use the library, but the project has a nice little "README":https://github.com/andris9/mailparser/blob/master/README.md with enough examples to get started.

h3. Full Text Search in 1k

Karussell has released "jsii":https://github.com/karussell/jsii, a full text search library.  It's in-memory, runs as a HTTP server, and is even compatible with Solr.  He's written more in a blog post: "jsii – full text search in 1K LOC of JavaScript!":http://karussell.wordpress.com/2010/11/02/jsii-full-text-search-in-1k-loc-of-javascript/.


