---
layout: post
title: "CoffeeScript - A Fun Little Language"
author: Ric Roberts
categories:
- libraries
---

"Jeremy Ashkenas":http://github.com/jashkenas/ has just released version 0.2.3 of his experimental "CoffeeScript":http://jashkenas.github.com/coffee-script/ language.  Jeremy describes it as "JavaScript's less ostentatious kid brother — the same genes, roughly the same height, but a different sense of style".  

Most statements in CoffeeScript have their analogues in Javascript: CoffeeScript just provides an alternative way to express them.  For me, CoffeeScript brings to mind certain aspects of JSON, Ruby, and maybe Python too.

CoffeeScript is actually a Ruby Library (available as a "gem":http://gemcutter.org/gems/coffee-script) that provides a <code>coffee</code> command that can compile _.coffee_ files into Javascript.

{% highlight ruby %}

# Assignment:
number: 42
opposite_day: true

# Conditions:
number: -42 if opposite_day

# Functions:
square: x => x * x

# Arrays:
list: [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]

# Objects:
math: {
  root:   Math.sqrt
  square: square
  cube:   x => x * square(x)
}

# Splats:
race: winner, runners... =>
  print(winner, runners)

# Existence:
alert("I knew it!") if elvis?

# Array comprehensions:
cubed_list: math.cube(num) for num in list

{% endhighlight %}

There's some "thorough documentation":http://jashkenas.github.com/coffee-script/ on Github, including loads of little runnable snippets.  Jeremy has also produced a full port of the "Underscore":http://documentcloud.github.com/underscore/ JavaScript library (that "we mentioned":http://dailyjs.com/2009/11/02/underscore/ a couple of months ago), which serves as a good example. 




