---
layout: post
title: "Node Updates"
author: Alex Young
categories:
- nodejs
---

Much like the regular jQuery Roundup, I thought a semi-regular "node.js":http://nodejs.org/ news update would be useful.  The "changelog":http://nodejs.org/changelog.html and "nodejs google group":http://groups.google.com/group/nodejs/ are good places to keep up to date.

h3. Kiwi

TJ has updated "kiwi":http://github.com/visionmedia/kiwi to version 0.2.2.  Kiwi is a package manager that's much like "RubyGems":http://rubygems.org/.  A lot of kiwi's functionality is in a "shell script":http://github.com/visionmedia/kiwi/blob/master/bin/kiwi, so you can do this without already having node:

{% highlight javascript %}
kiwi install node
{% endhighlight %}

This is possible because the dependencies are minimal:

* sed
* awk
* tar
* egrep

h3. Express

By the same author, "Express":http://expressjs.com/ is a web framework inspired by Sinatra.  We've featured it before on DailyJS, but recently it's had a lot of work to update it to work with the more recent node API changes.

As well as a "tonne of bug fixes":http://github.com/visionmedia/express/issues/closed, Express now has over 500 watchers on GitHub and four contributors.

h3. Do

"Do":http://github.com/creationix/do is a library for managing asynchronous non-blocking operations in node.  Usage is a bit like promises, but it doesn't require an external library.

Do can convert an external library to make it use Do-style continuables:

{% highlight javascript %}
var fs = Do.convert(require('fs'), ['readFile', 'writeFile']);
// Returns a copy of fs that has readFile and writeFile converted to Do-style continuables
{% endhighlight %}

h3. node-microseconds

If you're interested in super-accurate benchmarks, Elijah Insua has written a node library for getting microseconds out of the unix <code>gettimeofday</code> system call:

{% highlight javascript %}
var microseconds = require('../lib/node-microseconds').microseconds;
require('sys').puts(microseconds());
{% endhighlight %}
