---
layout: post
title: "jQuery Roundup"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- jquery
- plugins
- video
- html5
---

Welcome to the jQuery Plugin Roundup 26.  You can send your plugins in for review through our "contact form":/contact.html or "@dailyjs":http://twitter.com/dailyjs.

h3. jquery-swapable

"jquery-swapable":http://www.eslinstructor.net/demo/swappable/swappable_home.html (MIT License) by Vadim Kiryukhin is a little bit like "Sortable":http://jqueryui.com/demos/sortable/ but instead swaps items.  Usage is similar to Sortable, except it also requires a <code>cursorAt</code> parameter:

{% highlight javascript %}
$('#swappable').swappable({
  items: '.itemClass',
  cursorAt: { top: -10 } 
});
{% endhighlight %}

It will work with "lists":http://www.eslinstructor.net/demo/swappable/swappable_list.html, "grids":http://www.eslinstructor.net/demo/swappable/swappable_grid.html, and "horizontal rows":http://www.eslinstructor.net/demo/swappable/swappable_row.html.

The project is hosted on Google Code: "jquery-swapable":http://code.google.com/p/jquery-swapable/.

h3. jQuery Templates

I've mentioned Scott Guthrie's Microsoft-supported jQuery plugins before, but now there's news "jQuery Templates":http://api.jquery.com/category/plugins/templates/ will be included with jQuery 1.5.

Read more in "jQuery Templates, Data Link, and Globalization Accepted as Official jQuery Plugins":http://weblogs.asp.net/scottgu/archive/2010/10/04/jquery-templates-data-link-and-globalization-accepted-as-official-jquery-plugins.aspx.

h3. jquery.sg.video

"jquery.sg.video":http://github.com/filippo/jquery.sg.video (MPL) by Filippo Pacini is based on "Video for Everybody":http://diveintohtml5.org/video.html, an idea put forward by Kroc Camen.  The plugin uses feature detection from "Modernizr":http://www.modernizr.com/, and can provide information on format support through <code>$.support.video</code>.  For example, the browser I'm using right now returns this:

{% highlight javascript %}
{"ogg": "", "h264": "probably", "webm": ""}
{% endhighlight %}

If your videos have the same file name with different extensions for each format, you can set up a video like this:

{% highlight javascript %}
 $('#video-container').video('video_file_name', options);
{% endhighlight %}

This is a minimal yet useful plugin -- most video plugins attempt to provide a complete solution, with fancy player graphics and other features.  This one keeps things simple instead.
