---
layout: post
title: "Node Roundup"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- node
- server
- licensing
- books
- graphics
---

Welcome to the Node Roundup. Send in your apps and libraries using our "contact form":/contact.html or "@dailyjs":http://twitter.com/dailyjs.

There's quite a lot of commercial activity around Node lately.  This post includes details on a book started by a Yahoo! employee in association with O'Reilly, open source contributions from LearnBoost, and Joyent hiring full-time Node developers.

h3. A Node.js Book Project

Tom Hughes-Croucher, Technology Evangelist at Yahoo!, announced a Node book in association with O'Reilly Media, called _Up and Running With Node.js_.  There's a preview PDF available.  For more information, see his blog post, "Announcing a Node.js Book Project":http://developer.yahoo.com/blogs/ydn/posts/2010/11/announcing-a-node-js-book-project/.

h3. Server side HTML5 canvas API

LearnBoost are continuing to make some amazing open source contributions, this time in the form of "node-canvas":http://www.learnboost.com/introducing-node-canvas-server-side-html5-canvas-api/.  This is a server-side Canvas API that you can use to generate images.  That opens up a lot of possibilities given how many great JavaScript libraries generate images on Canvas, like graph libraries.

The library is available on "GitHub / node-canvas":https://github.com/learnboost/node-canvas and is MIT licensed.  It uses Cairo to generate graphics.

h3. Joyent and Node

In "Joyent and Node":http://groups.google.com/group/nodejs/browse_thread/thread/956a3431b1d9e937 Ryan Dahl talks about the growth of Node and building up a team of full-time development to better compete with other languages and platforms.

Some of the replies voiced concerns about the ownership of Node and relationship between the community and a partly commercial project.  Micheil Smith made a good point that calmed some of the concerns about "Joyent" appearing on the contributor agreement:

bq. The CLA has been in place for the last few months, all that has changed is now instead of transferring your IP and such to Ryan Dahl, you are now transferring them to Joyent, the text of the CLA is the same otherwise. 

The debate is interesting and worth reading if you're using Node for major projects.  Overall it sounds positive to me, and I'm looking forward to seeing what happens over the next few months as Joyent invest more into it.

