---
layout: post
title: jQuery 1.4 Released 
author: Ric Roberts
categories: 
- jquery
- libraries
- news
---

Last week, version 1.4 of the popular "jQuery":http://jquery.com/ library was released.  The new version includes some big performance gains, alongside other cool stuff like:

* The ability to use ".attr":http://api.jquery.com/attr -style setter functions for all setters.
* Rails-style "nested-parameter serialization":http://api.jquery.com/jQuery.param/ for Ajax calls.
* Quick Element Construction: You can now pass in an object to add attributes and events at element-creation time:
{% highlight js %}
jQuery("<div/>", {
    id: "foo",
    css: {
        height: "50px",
        width: "50px",
        color: "blue",
        backgroundColor: "#ccc"
    },
    click: function() {
       $(this).css("backgroundColor", "red"); 
    }
}).appendTo("body");
{% endhighlight %}

* Per-property Easing: You can now "specify easing for individual properties":http://api.jquery.com/animate/#per-property-easing of an effect.
* The new "jQuery.proxy()":http://api.jquery.com/jQuery.proxy/ method allows you to bind <code>this</code> inside an event-handler to a specific object.
* You can now "bind":http://api.jquery.com/bind many events to an element by passing an object containing those events:
{% highlight js %}
$("div.test").bind({
  click: function(){
    $(this).addClass("active");
  },
  mouseenter: function(){
    $(this).addClass("inside");
  },
  mouseleave: function(){
    $(this).removeClass("inside");
  }
});
{% endhighlight %}

* All events can now be ".live":http://api.jquery.com/live/ events.
* Some new DOM-traversal, manipulation and utility functions have been introduced.

The "14 Days of jQuery":http://jquery14.com/ website, created to celebrate the new release, covers "what's new":http://jquery14.com/day-01/jquery-14 in more detail.
