---
layout: post
title: "jQuery Roundup"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- jquery
- plugins
---

Welcome to the jQuery roundup 31.  You can send your plugins and articles in for review through our "contact form":/contact.html or "@dailyjs":http://twitter.com/dailyjs.  This article was written before a live studio audience.

h3. Spinners

"This jQuery spinner plugin":https://github.com/staaky/spinners by Nick Stakenburg can display loading animations using Canvas without using any gifs.  It'll work with IE through "ExplorerCanvas":http://code.google.com/p/explorercanvas/.

A spinner can be set up with <code>new Spinner('selector')</code>. It'll insert a div that contains a Canvas element.  I tried styling the div so it displays inline, and it worked, so you could use the spinner in a variety of instances.

h3. Snippet

I've been going through jQuery syntax highlighting projects, and one that I liked was "Snippet":http://steamdev.com/snippet/ by SteamDev.  It uses an existing project's highlighting definition files, "shjs":http://shjs.sourceforge.net/lang/.

All you need to do is put your code in a suitable tag and tell the library what highlighter to use:

{% highlight javascript %}
$('pre.js').snippet('javascript');
{% endhighlight %}

There are various colour schemes available (39 at present).

h3. jQuewy

"jQuewy":http://jquewy.com/ by Jamie McElwain is a library for loading jQuery plugins:

{% highlight javascript %}
$j('lettering');
$j('backbone');
{% endhighlight %}

There's a list of plugins here: "forrst.com/posts/JQuewy-5NZ":http://forrst.com/posts/JQuewy-5NZ.

The source is available on "GitHub / jQuery":https://github.com/jgmcelwain/jQuewy.

