---
layout: post
title: "Language Detection"
author: Alex Young
categories:
- programming
- tricks
- localization
---

My company's blog gets translated into Japanese, and when we launched the blog I put a link to it in the site's navigation.  A few weeks later I noticed a lot of Windows computers displayed the navigation text as a bunch of squares, which was annoying to say the least.  I suppose it's only natural that not all computers will have all languages and fonts, but I preferred using text to an image.

h3. JavaScript Solution

I reasoned that most people interested in reading Japanese would have the capability to do so, which meant I needed to conditionally display English or Japanese based on the browser's capabilities.  But how do you detect whether or not the fonts display properly?

After researching the problem I found it's possible to detect font sizes using half and full width katakana.  When typing Japanese you can usually select half or full width katakana: ｱ vs. ア.  If a browser can't display these properly, they'll be the same invalid character and therefore the same size.

I wrote a function like this:

{% highlight javascript %}
function japaneseFontsAvailable() {
  var halfWidth = document.createElement('span');
  var fullWidth = document.createElement('span');

  halfWidth.appendChild(document.createTextNode('\uFF71'));
  fullWidth.appendChild(document.createTextNode('\u30A2'));
  document.body.insertBefore(halfWidth, document.body.firstChild);
  document.body.insertBefore(fullWidth, document.body.firstChild);
  var havejapanesefont = halfWidth.offsetWidth != fullWidth.offsetWidth;

  document.body.removeChild(halfWidth);
  document.body.removeChild(fullWidth);
 
  return havejapanesefont;
}
{% endhighlight %}

I can't remember where I originally discovered this concept, but there's a stackoverflow thread on the subject: "Is it possible to detect East Asian language support?":http://stackoverflow.com/questions/604993/is-it-possible-to-detect-east-asian-language-support.

Have you written any similar localization hacks?
