---
layout: post
title: "jQuery Roundup"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- jquery
- plugins
- graphics
---

Welcome to the jQuery roundup 33. You can send your plugins and articles in for review through our "contact form":/contact.html or "@dailyjs":http://twitter.com/dailyjs.

h3. Face Detection

This "jQuery face detection":https://github.com/jaysalvat/jquery.facedetection plugin by Jay Salvat can detect faces in images using a Canvas.  The actual face detection code is by Liu Liu -- the plugin provides a jQuery interface to it:

{% highlight javascript %}
var coords = $('#myPicture').faceDetection();
{% endhighlight %}

There's a "demo":http://facedetection.jaysalvat.com/ if you'd like to try it out.

h3. 2D Transformations

"2D Transformations":https://github.com/heygrady/transform by "Grady":https://github.com/heygrady provides a simple API to CSS3 transformations, and degrades to Microsoft's matrix filter where appropriate.  The "Transform wiki":https://github.com/heygrady/transform/wiki/ has details on the client-side requirements and implementation, as well as code examples.

It can work with jQuery's CSS API as well providing its own method:

{% highlight javascript %}
$('#example').transform({rotate: '30deg'});
$('#example').css({rotate: '30deg'});
{% endhighlight %}

h3. jQuery.splitter

I've made two web apps recently that use resizable panels, but unfortunately I found "jQuery.splitter":http://krikus.com/js/splitter/ after I wrote my own code to do the same thing.

I found it easy to implement my own version of this, but Krikus's version has a lot of features, like disabling text selection during dragging, and minimum and maximum sizes for the panels.
