---
layout: post
title: "jQuery Plugin Roundup 16"
author: Alex Young 
categories: 
- jquery
- plugins
---

Welcome to the jQuery Plugin Roundup, episode 16.  Remember you can send your plugins in for review through our "contact form":/contact.html or "@dailyjs":http://twitter.com/dailyjs.

h3. loopedSlider

Do you know how many plugins I've found that slide images from left-to-right?  I'm not sure what compels so many people to write this plugin, but Nathan Searles has written another one and it seems nice enough.  "loopedSlider":http://github.com/nathansearles/loopedSlider requires simple markup and only needs you to call <code>('#loopedSlider').loopedSlider()</code> on the parent element.

h3. Touchwipe

"Touchwipe":http://www.netcu.de/jquery-touchwipe-iphone-ipad-library (MIT License) by Andreas Waltl makes detecting swipe events from touch screen devices easier.  It's a small plugin, so might be useful for projects where you want to add touch-screen gestures but don't want to use a large library.

The API requires a container element, then callbacks for the supported events:

{% highlight javascript %}
$(container).touchwipe({
  wipeLeft: function() { },
  wipeRight: function() { }
});
{% endhighlight %}

h3. Sliding Form

"Fancy Sliding Form with jQuery":http://tympanus.net/codrops/2010/06/07/fancy-sliding-form-with-jquery/ is an article about building a multi-part form with tabs that slides each part of the form horizontally.  The tabs show a red mark when they're invalid.  The nice thing about this jQuery-based approach is it makes visualising the form completion progress easier than separate pages: any form can be completed in any order.
