---
layout: post
title: "jQuery Roundup: 1.6.3, lccache, Storagify"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- jquery
- plugins
- localStorage
---

<div class="intro">
Note: You can send your plugins and articles in for review through our "contact form":/contact.html or "@dailyjs":http://twitter.com/dailyjs.
</div>

h3. jQuery 1.6.3

"jQuery 1.6.3":http://blog.jquery.com/2011/09/01/jquery-1-6-3-released/ has been released, not long after RC1.  This version fixes a much discussed XSS attack, animation browser tab switchiing issues, and better handling of HTML5 attribute names.

h3. lccache

"lccache":https://github.com/JohnMunsch/lccache (License: _Apache 2.0_) by Pamela Fox and John Munsch emulates memcache for client-side caching.  John Munsch's port uses "Lawnchair":http://westcoastlogic.com/lawnchair/ instead of HTML5 Local Storage, which means it should work in older browsers.

The library has three methods: <code>set</code>, <code>get</code> and <code>remove</code>:

{% highlight javascript %}
//          key,        value,          time/expiration
lccache.set('greeting', 'Hello World!', 2);

lccache.get('greeting');
// Returns 'Hello World!'

// Objects can also be stored
lccache.set('data', { 'greeting': 'Hello World!' }, 2);
lccache.get('data').greeting;
{% endhighlight %}

Pamela's real world examples included developing against JSON APIs on unreliable networks.  The most obvious example is a mobile web app.  I'd also consider it for single page apps, because it makes knowing when to refresh data that might change on the server a lot easier.

h3. Storagify

"Storagify":http://ek.alphaschildren.org/resources/jquery-plugins/storagify/ (GitHub: "ekdevdes / Storagify":https://github.com/ekdevdes/Storagify, License: _MIT/GPL_) by Ethan Kramer combines HTML5 <code>contenteditable</code> with Local Storage to make potentially any element editable.  Calling <code>$('selector').storagify('storageKey');</code> makes the element editable, and changes will be visible after a page refresh.

Now imagine combining this with a simple JSON API and you've got yourself a CMS in minutes!

