---
layout: post
title: "Let's Make a Framework: Promises Part 3"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- frameworks
- tutorials
- lmaf
- documentation
- promises
---

<div class="intro">
_Let's Make a Framework_ is an ongoing series about building a JavaScript framework from the ground up.

These articles are tagged with "lmaf":http://dailyjs.com/tags.html#lmaf.  The project we're creating is called "Turing":http://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js.  Documentation is available at "turingjs.com":http://turingjs.com/.
</div>

Over the last two weeks I've been looking at how web frameworks implement promises, and I've built a little <code>Promise</code> class along the way.

* "Promises: Part 1":http://dailyjs.com/2011/06/02/framework-65/
* "Promises: Part 2":http://dailyjs.com/2011/06/09/framework-66/

h3. Building on the Promise Class

To build on last week's example we first need to make it sit alongside the rest of the framework code.  I've created <code>turing.promise.js</code>, and <code>test/promise_test.js</code>, then added code comments for Turing's annotated source code.

Here's what the annotated source looks like now:

{% highlight javascript %}
/*!
 * Turing Promise
 * Copyright (C) 2010-2011 Alex R. Young
 * MIT Licensed
 */

/**
 * The Turing Promise module.
 */
(function() {

  /**
   * The Promise class.
   */
  function Promise() {
    var self = this;
    this.pending = [];

    /**
     * Resolves a promise.
     *
     * @param {Object} A value
     */
    this.resolve = function(result) {
      self.complete('resolve', result);
    },
{% endhighlight %}

This is what part of the unit test looks like:

{% highlight javascript %}
'test then': function() {
  function delay(ms) {
    var p = new turing.Promise();
    setTimeout(p.resolve, ms);
    return p;
  }

  function timeout(duration, limit) {
    var p = new turing.Promise();
    setTimeout(p.resolve, duration);
    setTimeout(p.reject, limit);
    return p;
  }

  delay(1000).then(function() {
    assert.ok('Delay completed');
  });
{% endhighlight %}

h3. Framework Integration

One of the reasons I was interested in using promises was to make animation code more accessible.  The following example should be possible: 

{% highlight javascript %}
turing().delay(1000).then(function() {
  // A second has passed!
});
{% endhighlight %}

This could be tested by looking at the current time:

{% highlight javascript %}
'test chain': function() {
  var start = (new Date()).valueOf();

  // Don't match on exactly 1000 because setTimeout isn't accurate
  turing().delay(1010).then(function() {
    assert.ok((new Date()).valueOf() - start >= 1000);
  });
}
{% endhighlight %}

h3. Implementation

A few months ago we added "middleware" to Turing which allows features to be injected based on the parameters passed to <code>turing()</code>.  Satisfying the previous test requires no parameters.  In future, the <code>Promise</code> module should be integrated with the animation module and supporting chain hooks can be added there:

{% highlight javascript %}
var chain = {};

turing.init(function() {
  if (arguments.length === 0)
    return chain;
});

chain.delay = function(ms) {
  var p = new turing.Promise();
  setTimeout(p.resolve, ms);
  return p;
};
{% endhighlight %}

Now <code>turing().delay(1000).then(callback);</code> is entirely possible!

h3. Conclusion

I've updated Turing's repository with all of this, in "commit d64f0cf":https://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js/tree/d64f0cf1339f4dd0cbd8a0bb9317f8f4b2341446.

