---
layout: post
title: "Node Roundup: Sequelize 1.0, node-shell, Formaline"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- node
- modules
- database
- cli
- express
---

h3. Sequelize 1.0.0

"Sequelize":http://www.sequelizejs.com/ (GitHub: "sdepold / sequelize":https://github.com/sdepold/sequelize, "License":https://github.com/sdepold/sequelize/blob/master/LICENSE, npm: _sequelize_) by Sascha Depold has just been updated to version 1.0.0.  Sascha has written about the release in "Changes in Sequelize 1.0.0":http://blog.depold.com/post/5936116582/changes-in-sequelize-1-0-0.

There's a nice new API for chained queries:

{% highlight javascript %}
new Sequelize.Utils.QueryChainer
  .add(person.save())
  .add(pet.save())
  .run()
  .on('success', function() { });
{% endhighlight %}

And changes to the way models are instantiated:

{% highlight javascript %}
// Before
new Model({attr1: 1, attr2: 2}).save()

// Now
Model.build({}).save()
// to first create the instance and save it afterwards or…

Model.create({})
// to create it and directly write it to the database
{% endhighlight %}

Other changes include:

* An event-based architecture instead of callbacks
* More convenient syncing
* A <code>count</code> method for models
* New model schema options: unique, primaryKey, autoIncrement

And plenty more!

If you're interested in Sequelize but haven't tried it before, "www.sequelizejs.com":http://www.sequelizejs.com/ has great documentation to get you started.

h3. node-shell

"node-shell":https://github.com/wdavidw/node-shell (npm: _shell_) by David Worms is a module for building shell scripts.  It's interesting because it lifts a lot of concepts straight from Express, particular "pluggable" modules.  It's very similar to working with Express.

This is a cut-down example from the author's documentation:

{% highlight javascript %}
var shell = require('shell');
var app = new shell.Shell();

app.configure(function() {
    app.use(shell.history({
        shell: app
    }));

    // ... snip
});

// Command registration
app.cmd('redis keys :pattern', 'Find keys', function(req, res, next){
    if(!app.client){
        app.client = require('redis').createClient();
    }
    app.client.keys(req.params.pattern, function(err, keys){
        if(err){ return res.styles.red(err.message), next(); }
        res.cyan(keys.join('\n')||'no keys');
        res.prompt();
    });
});

// Event notification
app.on('redis quit', function(){
    if(app.client){
        app.client.quit();
    }
});
{% endhighlight %}

If you're a web app developer who hasn't worked with the console before, node-shell looks like it might be a good way to leapfrog a lot of tediousness.

h3. Formaline

"Formaline":https://github.com/rootslab/formaline (License: _MIT_, npm: _formaline_) by Guglielmo Ferri helps handle form requests and file uploads, complete with connect middleware.  It has several interesting features:

* Progress tracking
* HTML5 multiple file upload support
* Speaks JSON
* Tested against malicious and incorrect HTTP headers
* Handles filename collisions
* The SHA1 data checksum of received files can be returned

Basic usage looks like this:

{% highlight javascript %}
var formaline = require('formaline'),
    form = new formaline({});

form.on('filereceived', function(json) {

});
{% endhighlight %}

The resulting <code>json</code> object will contain these properties:

{% highlight javascript %}
json = { 
  hashname: '..',           // <-- 40 HEX SHA1 STRING ( IT IS THE (SHA1) RESULTING HASH OF FILENAME )
  name: '..',               // <-- FILE ORIGINAL NAME  
  path: '..',               // <-- FILE PATH       
  type: '..',               // <-- MIME TYPE
  size: 217,                // <-- BYTES 
  fieldname: '..',          // <-- FILE FIELD NAME 
  datasha1sum: '..',        // <-- 40 HEX SHA1 STRING  ( IT IS THE (SHA1) RESULTING HASH OF THE FILE'S DATA )
  lastModifiedDate: '..'    // <-- FILE MTIME       
}
{% endhighlight %}

