---
layout: post
title: "Let's Make a Framework: Plugins Part 2"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- frameworks
- tutorials
- lmaf
- documentation
- plugins
---

Welcome to part 51 of _Let's Make a Framework_, the ongoing series about building a JavaScript framework.

If you haven't been following along, these articles are tagged with "lmaf":http://dailyjs.com/tags.html#lmaf.  The project we're creating is called "Turing":http://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js.  Documentation is available at "turingjs.com":http://turingjs.com/.

h3. Implementing Plugins

For the basic jQuery-style plugin support we need to be able to insert a function so it can access Turing's chained API.  Remember that this is all DOM-oriented, so we can use <code>domChain</code>.  Here's a quick example:

{% highlight javascript %}
turing.domChain.turnRed = function() {
  this[0].style.backgroundColor = '#ff0000';
};

turing('#element').turnRed();
{% endhighlight %}

This would actually work given the correct markup.  The <code>turnRed</code> method _should_ work anywhere in a chain off <code>turing()</code>, just like jQuery!

h3. A Public API

I don't believe relying on <code>domChain</code> is a good idea -- for a start it's only named that way to make it clear for the tutorial series.  It may change in the future.  I'd prefer a plugin API that supports some metadata, like we looked at last week.  This would enable us to do things like reflect on plugins, perhaps facilitating a lazy-loading dependency system.

So how about something like this?

{% highlight javascript %}
turing.plugins.register('turnRed', {
  name: 'Turn Things Red',
  version: '1.0.0',
  description: 'Turns the background red',
  author: 'Alex Young <alex@example.com>',
  licenses: [ { type: 'MIT' } ],

  turnRed: function() {
    this[0].style.backgroundColor = '#ff0000';
    return this;
  }
});
{% endhighlight %}

Returning <code>this</code> will allow subsequent chained calls, but this might not always be desired so it isn't enforced.

h3. Testing the Plugin API

Before getting into a mess with code, let's write some plugin API tests.  We know we need a <code>register</code> function, so given a function called <code>registerExamplePlugin</code> that creates a simple test plugin, this should pass:

{% highlight javascript %}
exports.testPlugins = {
  'test plugin registration and removal': function() {
    registerExamplePlugin();
    assert.ok(turing('#example').turnRed());
  }
};
{% endhighlight %}

In this example, <code>assert.ok</code> should pass because I intend to return <code>this</code> from the example plugin.

What about removing plugins?  Let's test for that too:

{% highlight javascript %}
exports.testPlugins = {
  'test plugin registration and removal': function() {
    registerExamplePlugin();

    assert.ok(turing('#example').turnRed());

    turing.plugins.remove('turnRed');
    assert.ok(!turing.plugins.hasOwnProperty('turnRed'));
  }
};
{% endhighlight %}

How about namespace collisions and removal of non-existent plugins?  It would be nice if there were some exceptions for these, <code>plugins.AlreadyRegistered</code> and <code>plugins.NotFound</code> would make sense:

{% highlight javascript %}
exports.testPlugins = {
  'test plugin registration and removal': function() {
    registerExamplePlugin();

    assert.ok(turing('#example').turnRed());

    turing.plugins.remove('turnRed');
    assert.ok(!turing.plugins.hasOwnProperty('turnRed'));
  },

  'test AlreadyRegistered': function() {
    registerExamplePlugin();

    assert.throws(function() {
      registerExamplePlugin();
    }, turing.plugins.AlreadyRegistered);
  },

  'test removing a non-existent plugin': function() {
    assert.throws(function() {
      turing.plugins.remove('turnBlue');
    }, turing.plugins.NotFound);
  }
};
{% endhighlight %}

h3. The Implementation

With full comments, this is what I came up with to make the tests pass:

{% highlight javascript %}
/*!
 * Turing Plugins
 * Copyright (C) 2011 Alex R. Young
 * MIT Licensed
 */

/**
 * The Turing plugin module.
 */
(function() {
  var plugins = {};
  plugins.registered = {};
  plugins.AlreadyRegistered = Error;
  plugins.NotFound = Error;

  /**
   * Registers a plugin, making it available for
   * chained DOM calls.
   * 
   * Throws turing.plugins.AlreadyRegistered if a
   * plugin with the same name has been registered.
   *
   * @param {String} The name of your plugin method 
   * @param {Object} Your plugin
   */
  plugins.register = function(methodName, metadata) {
    if (plugins.registered[methodName]) {
      throw new plugins.AlreadyRegistered('Already registered a plugin called: ' + methodName);
    }

    plugins.registered[methodName] = metadata;
    turing.domChain[methodName] = metadata[methodName];
  };

  /**
   * Removes a plugin.  Throws turing.plugins.NotFound if
   * the plugin could not be found.
   *
   * @param {String} The name of the plugin
   */
  plugins.remove = function(methodName) {
    if (!plugins.registered.hasOwnProperty(methodName)) {
      throw new plugins.NotFound('Plugin not found: ' + methodName);
    } else {
      delete plugins.registered[methodName]
      delete turing.domChain[methodName];
    }
  };

  turing.plugins = plugins;
})();
{% endhighlight %}

This implementation doesn't force too much structure on people -- you can build plugins with whatever tools you want, as long as a single function can invoke it.  This was inspired by jQuery.  What's slightly different to jQuery is you're forced to include _some_ machine-readable metadata.  I might even force inclusion of properties like <code>licenses</code> and <code>author</code> because it drives me nuts when people email me jQuery plugins to review on DailyJS with little more than a crappy bit of code hanging off <code>jQuery.fn</code>.

h3. Conclusion

The metadata I mocked up last week included properties like <code>engines</code> (for determining if a plugin can be run in a browser or server-side interpreter), and <code>cdn</code>.  I'm hinting at a dependency loading system here, which I'd like to go over in a future tutorial.

The commit for this week was "d5de1c0":https://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js/tree/d5de1c0bbee04ec0d735784ffbc6879413a1b65d.
