---
layout: post
title: "Node Roundup: How To Module, Node Event Loops, The Node Ahead, Connect 1.0"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- node
- middleware
- modules
- hyperbole
---

Prepare your favourite Instapaper/Read It Later client for a whole bunch of Node articles!

h3. How To Module

"How To Module":http://howtonode.org/how-to-module by Isaac Z. Schlueter (the npm guy!) is a detailed article about writing a Node module.  It includes advice on npm, README, version control, testing, bindings, libraries, and a lot more.  It covers the entire project lifecycle, so if you're itching to release something but are fairly new to Node I recommending reading it.

h3. Understanding the Node.js Event Loop

"Understanding the node.js event loop":http://blog.mixu.net/2011/02/01/understanding-the-node-js-event-loop/ by Mixu is an introduction to Node's event loop.  It's the kind of thing that I like to bookmark the next time a potential client or boss asks, "why Node?"

bq. Having asynchronous I/O is good, because I/O is more expensive than most code and we should be doing something better than just waiting for I/O.

h3. The Node Ahead

In "The Node Ahead: JavaScript leaps from browser into future":http://www.theregister.co.uk/2011/03/01/the_rise_and_rise_of_node_dot_js/, _The Register_ author Cade Metz discusses the history of Node, from its inception to subsequent success.

bq. The overarching point, however, is that Node is optimal for the new breed of real-time web apps. Yes, there are other means of building real-time tools, but Node lets you build real-time tools on the same platform that runs the rest of your site.

The article cites open source favourites LearnBoost, and Joyent's upcoming cloud services. 

h3. Connect 1.0

Meanwhile in the last week, TJ Holowaychuk released "Connect 1.0":http://senchalabs.github.com/connect/ which works with Node 0.4.x.

