---
layout: post
title: "Node Tutorial Part 13"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- server
- node
- tutorials
- lmawa
- nodepad
- npm
- express
- stylus
- css
---

Welcome to part 12 of _Let's Make a Web App_, a tutorial series about building a web app with "Node":http://nodejs.org/.  This series will walk you through the major areas you'll need to face when building your own applications.  These tutorials are tagged with "lmawa":/tags.html#lmawa.

Previous tutorials:

* "Part 1: Introduction":http://dailyjs.com/2010/11/01/node-tutorial/ 
* "Part 2: Installation and Skeleton App":http://dailyjs.com/2010/11/08/node-tutorial-2/, source code commit: "4ea936b":https://github.com/alexyoung/nodepad/commit/4ea936b4b426012528fc722c7576391b48d5a0b7
* "Part 3: RESTful Methods and Testing":http://dailyjs.com/2010/11/15/node-tutorial-3/, source code commit: "39e66cb":https://github.com/alexyoung/nodepad/commit/39e66cb9d11a67044495beb0de1934ac4d9c4786
* "Part 4: Templates, Partials, Creating and Editing Documents":http://dailyjs.com/2010/11/22/node-tutorial-4/, source code commit: "f66fdb":https://github.com/alexyoung/nodepad/commit/f66fdb5c3bebdf693f62884ffc06a40b93328bb5
* "Part 5: Authentication, Sessions, Access Control Middleware":http://dailyjs.com/2010/12/06/node-tutorial-5/, source code commit: "03fe9b":https://github.com/alexyoung/nodepad/tree/03fe9b272fea1beb98ffefcf5f7ed226c81c49fd
* "Part 6: Interface Basics":http://dailyjs.com/2010/12/20/node-tutorial-6/, source code commit: "f2261c":https://github.com/alexyoung/nodepad/tree/f2261c510c987b35df1e6e000be6e1e591cd9d6d
* "Part 7: Node Library Versions, Jade Tricks, Error Pages":http://dailyjs.com/2010/12/27/node-tutorial-7/, source code commit: "929f5":https://github.com/alexyoung/nodepad/tree/929f5642ca1b2fa664df517457e056c92490d892
* "Part 8: Flash Messages and Helpers":http://dailyjs.com/2011/01/03/node-tutorial-8/, source code commit: "841a49":https://github.com/alexyoung/nodepad/tree/841a493c03f0421dd1a2279fccac3fbcf1e17b1f
* "Part 9: Remember Me":http://dailyjs.com/2011/01/10/node-tutorial-9/, source code commit: "1904c":https://github.com/alexyoung/nodepad/tree/1904c6b7f95d708474a5d42e8cdfd40e96243a7a
* "Part 10: Markdown":http://dailyjs.com/2011/01/24/node-tutorial-10/, source code commit: "11d33":https://github.com/alexyoung/nodepad/tree/11d33e19066e76c8559857fb780ac9fd1ecf68ac
* "Part 11: Better Testing":http://dailyjs.com/2011/01/31/node-tutorial-11/, source code commit: "6a269ce":https://github.com/alexyoung/nodepad/tree/6a269ce4ddb6c7dc78598b488c93b38828fb5763
* "Part 12: Updating Mongoose":http://dailyjs.com/2011/02/07/node-tutorial-12/, source code commit: "2a8725":https://github.com/alexyoung/nodepad/tree/2a8725f089ef052ec8b4ccfed8f6fbece70a606a

h3. Stylus

I wanted to improve Nodepad's interface, but seeing as there's been a lot of interest in "Stylus":http://learnboost.github.com/stylus/ lately I thought it might be good to switch to that while I was at it.  Stylus is a CSS shorthand language, with many powerful features like variables, interpolation, mixins, and nested selectors.

Stylus can be installed with npm:

{% highlight sh %}
npm install stylus
{% endhighlight %}

Actually using it is fairly easy, it comes bundled with a middleware layer for Connect:

{% highlight javascript %}
var stylus = require('stylus');

app.configure(function() {
  // ...
  app.use(stylus.middleware({ src: __dirname + '/public' }));
{% endhighlight %}

h3. Writing Stylus

In Stylus, white space is significant, but this allows us to drop braces, colons, and semi-colons.  That means our <code>body</code> style can be rewritten like this:

{% highlight css %}
body
  padding 0
  margin 0
  font 14px "Lucida Grande", "Helvetica Nueue", Arial, sans-serif
{% endhighlight %}

Another useful feature is variables.  I looked through the file to find repeated chunks of CSS and replaced them with variables.  Variables are written as <code>variable-name = style</code>:

{% highlight css %}
active-colour = #dfe3ea
highlight-colour = #c5c5c5
faded-white = #f0f0f0
light-grey = #f6f6f6
medium-grey = #999
dark-grey = #666
black = #111
selected-colour = #8897ba
{% endhighlight %}

These are the colours that I pulled out of our original stylesheet.  Now we can write styles with these variables:

{% highlight css %}
.outline-view
  position absolute
  width 250px
  background-color active-colour
{% endhighlight %}

In cases where we want to reuse variables and replace entire lines, we can use functions:

{% highlight css %}
glass-background()
  background light-grey url('/images/glass.png') repeat-x 50% 50%

grey-border()
  border-top 1px solid highlight-colour

#controls
  position absolute
  left 252px
  bottom 0
  height 30px
  grey-border()
  glass-background()
{% endhighlight %}

Functions can accept parameters as well:

{% highlight css %}
centre-shadow(size, colour)
  -moz-box-shadow 0 0 size colour
  -webkit-box-shadow 0 0 size colour
  box-shadow 0 0 size colour

.flash .ui-corner-all
  width 300px
  margin 50px auto 0 auto
  padding 0 5px
  opacity 0.9
  font-weight bold
  centre-shadow(8px, light-grey)
{% endhighlight %}

Functions work as expected and can easily be combined with variables.

h3. Bug Fixes

Meanwhile, "Eiríkur Heiðar Nilsson":https://github.com/eirikurn helped improve the <code>LoginToken</code> model.  The save middleware always replaced both the token and the series value were being updated, instead of just the token:

{% highlight javascript %}
  LoginToken.pre('save', function(next) {
    // Automatically create the tokens
    this.token = this.randomToken();

    // This is eirikurn's modification:
    if (this.isNew)
      this.series = this.randomToken();

    next();
  });
{% endhighlight %}

This is in reference to "part 9 of the Nodepad tutorials":http://dailyjs.com/2011/01/10/node-tutorial-9/ where we implemented "remember me" for the login form.

h3. Conclusion

I think Stylus is a great way to make CSS more efficient.  Take a look at "commit 0a70e40":https://github.com/alexyoung/nodepad/tree/0a70e40cafd982c1f2421ecf16caa887fc49ae39 to see how I switched to Stylus ("the diffs":https://github.com/alexyoung/nodepad/commit/0a70e40cafd982c1f2421ecf16caa887fc49ae39 will help).  And, just so you know, switching to Stylus wasn't too hard -- I basically did <code>g/[{};:]/s///g</code> in vim!
