---
layout: post
title: "UtahJS Conference, jQuery Conference 2012: UK, DevCon5"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- events
- uk
- us
- jquery
- webgl
---

h3. UtahJS Conference

"UtahJS":http://utahjs.com/ announced a conference as part of the "Silicon Slopes":http://siliconslopes.com/ conference which will be held on March 29-31, 2012.  They have issued a "call For papers":http://utahjs.com/papers/, so if you're interested in speaking fill out the form to apply.

bq. This is going to be big. Think of hundreds of people, all in the same place, learning about JavaScript and HTML5!

Talks should be 45 minutes with 5 minutes for questions.

h3. jQuery Conference 2012: UK

"Query Conference 2012: UK":http://events.jquery.org/2012/uk/ will be held in Oxford on the 10th of February.  Tickets are on sale at "jQuery UK 2012 tickets":http://jqueryuk.eventbrite.co.uk/ with prices starting at £160 -- lots of options are available, including access to selected workshops.

Speakers currently include Paul Irish, Todd Parker, and Addy Osmani.

The original announcement on the jQuery blog is here: "jQuery Conference 2012: United Kingdom Announced":http://blog.jquery.com/2011/11/01/jquery-conference-2012-united-kingdom-announced/.

h3. DevCon5

"DevCon5":http://html5.tmcnet.com/conference/california/ will be held on December 7-8 in Santa Clara, California.  Tickets are $595.  The conference is focused on HTML5, and there are two talks that focus on WebGL.  The Khronos Group posted "Why You Need to be at DevCon5":http://www.khronos.org/news/events/devcon5-santa-clara which details the two WebGL talks:

* Introduction to WebCL and WebGL by Neil Trevett from Nvidia
* Hands on with WebGL by Zhenyao Mo, from Google Chrome's GPU team

