---
layout: post
title: "Let's Make a Framework: Element Attributes Part 3"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- frameworks
- tutorials
- lmaf
- documentation
- dom
---

Welcome to part 63 of _Let's Make a Framework_, the ongoing series about building a JavaScript framework.

These articles are tagged with "lmaf":http://dailyjs.com/tags.html#lmaf.  The project we're creating is called "Turing":http://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js.  Documentation is available at "turingjs.com":http://turingjs.com/.

For the past two weeks I've been looking at accessing element attributes.  This week I'll demonstrate how to write element attributes.

* "Element Attributes":http://dailyjs.com/2011/05/05/framework-61/
* "Element Attributes Part 2":http://dailyjs.com/2011/05/12/framework-62/

h3. API Design

I like the idea of using the same method for both getting and setting element attributes:

{% highlight javascript %}
// Get
turing('selector').attr('name');

// Set
turing('selector').attr('name', 'value');
{% endhighlight %}

It's fairly easy to remember this and easy to implement.

h3. <code>setAttribute</code>

Remember <code>element.getAttribute</code>?  Well, there's also <code>setAttribute</code>.  It was introduced in "DOM Level 1":http://www.w3.org/TR/REC-DOM-Level-1/level-one-core.html#method-setAttribute, so browser support isn't terrible.

Most of the cross-browser issues relating to <code>getAttribute</code> should apply to writing attributes because they were almost all related to correcting IE's interpretation of the attribute's capitalisation.  That means we can use <code>setAttribute</code> in a very similar way.

h3. Null Values

According to MDC:

bq. Even though <code>getAttribute()</code> returns null for missing attributes, you should use <code>removeAttribute()</code> instead of <code>elt.setAttribute(attr, null)</code> to remove the attribute.

This is present in jQuery's "attributes.js":https://github.com/jquery/jquery/blob/master/src/attributes.js implementation:

{% highlight javascript %}
if ( value === null ) {
  jQuery.removeAttr( elem, name );
  return undefined;
{% endhighlight %}

Note that we must distinguish between <code>null</code> and <code>undefined</code> -- because we're using <code>attr</code> to read and write values, <code>undefined</code> is an absence of a value which implies reading the attribute.

That means we need to use <code>element.removeAttribute</code> when <code>null</code> is passed.  However, this method has poor browser support.  When I tried jQuery's implementation in IE6 I seemed to get an empty string instead of <code>undefined</code>, so I think a true cross-browser remove attribute method might be out of scope here.

To my knowledge, this is the closest I can get in IE:

{% highlight javascript %}
function removeAttribute(element, name) {
  if (element.nodeType !== nodeTypes.ELEMENT_NODE) return;
  if (propertyFix[name]) name = propertyFix[name];
  setAttribute(element, name, '');
  element.removeAttributeNode(element.getAttributeNode(name));
}
{% endhighlight %}

h3. Tests

I wrote this test to help me implement the core functionality for writing attributes:

{% highlight javascript %}
'test setting attributes': function() {
  var element = turing.dom.get('#attr-write')[0],
      link = turing.dom.get('#attr-write a')[0],
      input = turing.dom.get('#attr-write form input')[0],
      button = turing.dom.get('#attr-write form button')[0];

  turing.dom.attr(element, 'id', 'attr-test2');
  assert.equal(turing.dom.attr(element, 'id'), 'attr-test2');

  turing.dom.attr(element, 'class', 'example2');
  assert.equal(turing.dom.attr(element, 'class'), 'example2');
  
  turing.dom.attr(element, 'tabindex', 1);
  assert.equal(turing.dom.attr(element, 'tabindex'), 1);

  turing.dom.attr(link, 'href', '/somewhere');
  assert.equal(turing.dom.attr(link, 'href'), '/somewhere');

  // Forms
  turing.dom.attr(input, 'value', 'changed-value');
  assert.equal(turing.dom.attr(input, 'value'), 'changed-value');

  turing.dom.attr(input, 'name', 'changed-name');
  assert.equal(turing.dom.attr(input, 'name'), 'changed-name');
  
  turing.dom.attr(button, 'name', 'changed-button-name');
  assert.equal(turing.dom.attr(button, 'name'), 'changed-button-name');
  
  turing.dom.attr(button, 'value', 'changed-button-value');
  assert.equal(turing.dom.attr(button, 'value'), 'changed-button-value');
}
{% endhighlight %}

h3. Implementation

Building on last week's code, I added a check to see if the attribute value is <code>null</code> or <code>undefined</code>:

{% highlight javascript %}
/**
 * Get or set attributes.
 *
 * @param {Object} element A DOM element
 * @param {String} attribute The attribute name
 * @param {String} value The attribute value
 */
dom.attr = function(element, attribute, value) {
  if (typeof value === 'undefined') {
    return turing.detect('getAttribute') ?
      element.getAttribute(attribute) : getAttribute(element, attribute);
  } else {
    if (value === null) {
      return dom.removeAttr(element, attribute);
    } else {
      return turing.detect('getAttribute') ?
        element.setAttribute(attribute, value) : setAttribute(element, attribute, value);
    }
  }
};
{% endhighlight %}

I reused the <code>getAttribute</code> capability test for writing attributes.  I started off with a simple attribute setter for IE:

{% highlight javascript %}
function setAttribute(element, name, value) {
  if (propertyFix[name]) {
    name = propertyFix[name];
  }

  return element.setAttribute(name, value);
}
{% endhighlight %}

But the button test failed so I had to add similar code from <code>getAttribute</code>:

{% highlight javascript %}
if (name === 'value' && element.nodeName === 'BUTTON') {
  return element.getAttributeNode(name).nodeValue = value;
}
{% endhighlight %}

h3. Conclusion

Getting and setting attributes is extremely similar, and it just goes to show how frustratingly similar browser implementations have been.  The strange case of IE's <code>removeAttribute</code> behaviour still baffles me, but if I find a good solution I'll write an update.

This week's code is in "commit c5625f8":https://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js/tree/c5625f82ccd6f18df5be70f7f5c102de9fc908cb.
