---
layout: post
title: "Node Roundup: armory, imageable, spreadsheets"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- node
- modules
- games
- graphics
---

h3. node-armory

"node-armory":https://github.com/xtian/node-armory (npm: _armory_) by Christian Wesselhoeft is a library for accessing Blizzard's "REST API for World of Warcraft":http://blizzard.github.com/api-wow-docs/.  It can fetch data about realm status, characters, guilds, arenas, items, and more.

Rather than messing around with lots of HTTP calls, this is now possible:

{% highlight javascript %}
var armory = require('armory');

armory.publicKey = 'publickey';
armory.privateKey = 'privatekey';

// Single character
armory.character('Dargonaut_Shadowmoon', function(err, character) {

});
{% endhighlight %}

h3. node-imageable

"node-imageable":https://github.com/dawanda/node-imageable (npm: _imageable_) is Connect middleware for image manipulation.  Given an image's URL, it can resize, fit, and crop it.  It also has configuration options for before/after event handlers, which could be used for generating statistics or logging.

The actual image processing is down with good old ImageMagick.  A wrapper is used which just shells out with <code>exec</code>.

DaWanda, the company that made node-imageable, also offers "node-imageable-server":https://github.com/dawanda/node-imageable-server which is a fully-featured Express app demonstrating the library.

h3. node-spreadsheets

"node-spreadsheets":https://github.com/EastCloud/node-spreadsheets (npm: _spreadsheets_) from EastCloud is a library for accessing Google Spreadsheets:

{% highlight javascript %}
var authenticate = require("spreadsheets");

authenticate({
  Email: 'alex@example.com',
  Passwd: 'password'
}, function(err, spreadsheets) {
  spreadsheets.list(function(err, list) {
    var spreadsheet = list['spreadsheet key'];
    spreadsheet.worksheet(function(err, sheets) {
      // etc...
    });
  });
});
{% endhighlight %}

This library makes it possible to get and set values in spreadsheets, and even change cell styles.

