---
layout: post
title: "Let's Make a Framework: Writing CSS Properties"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- frameworks
- tutorials
- lmaf
- documentation
- dom
- css
---

Welcome to part 59 of _Let's Make a Framework_, the ongoing series about building a JavaScript framework.

These articles are tagged with "lmaf":http://dailyjs.com/tags.html#lmaf.  The project we're creating is called "Turing":http://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js.  Documentation is available at "turingjs.com":http://turingjs.com/.

I had some feedback on last week's commit from "John-David Dalton":http://www.allyoucanleet.com/ which can be viewed here: "commit 9dc312":https://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js/commit/9dc312f778dd2562d9460bed92a2242642113854.  The changes he suggested help keep behaviour relative to the element's document rather than the global one.  I tested both suggestions in IE/Firefox/WebKit.

h3. Writing CSS

Last week we were doing this sort of thing:

{% highlight javascript %}
turing('#dom-test').css('background-color');
{% endhighlight %}

Now CSS properties can be read, how about writing them?  I discussed how jQuery implements writing styles back in "part 54":http://dailyjs.com/2011/03/17/framework-54/.  The algorithm works like this:

# Check the element has the right <code>nodeType</code>
# Get the CSS property name, correcting case
# Make sure that <code>NaN</code> and <code>null</code> values aren't set
# If a number was passed in, add <code>px</code> to the value (except for certain CSS properties)
# Write the value using the element's <code>style</code> property

This process is actually fairly simple.  Even the cases where <code>px</code> shouldn't be added are properties that aren't usually manipulated:

{% highlight javascript %}
// Exclude the following css properties to add px
cssNumber: {
  "zIndex": true,
  "fontWeight": true,
  "opacity": true,
  "zoom": true,
  "lineHeight": true
}
{% endhighlight %}

It's easier to pass numbers rather than remembering to use '10px'.  The reason this is an object with properties set to <code>true</code> is to make it easy to use: <code>jQuery.cssNumber[property]</code> is nice and succinct.

h3. Tests

These are the tests I want to pass:

{% highlight javascript %}
'test writing style properties': function() {
  var element = turing.dom.get('#dom-test')[0],
      expected = element.currentStyle ? '#f5f5f5' : 'rgb(245, 245, 245)';

  turing.dom.css(element, { 'background-color': expected, 'width': 1000 });

  assert.equal(turing.dom.css(element, 'background-color'), expected);
  assert.equal(turing.dom.css(element, 'backgroundColor'), expected);
  assert.equal(turing.dom.css(element, 'width'), '1000px');
},

'test chained writing style properties': function() {
  var element = turing.dom.get('#dom-test')[0],
      expected = element.currentStyle ? '#f1f1f1' : 'rgb(241, 241, 241)';

  turing('#dom-test').css({ 'background-color': expected });

  assert.equal(turing('#dom-test').css('background-color'), expected);
  assert.equal(turing('#dom-test').css('backgroundColor'), expected);
}
{% endhighlight %}

As usual I'm testing both the "modular" API and chained API.  The first test includes a numerical value that should automatically get <code>px</code> set.  I haven't tested all the edge cases because I don't think it would help you learn anything about DOM programming.

h3. Implementation

The original <code>dom.css</code> method I defined already detected cases where styles should be written, so I've added a loop to iterate over an object with a list of styles:

{% highlight javascript %}
/**
 * Gets or sets style values.
 *
 * @param {Object} element A DOM element 
 * @returns {Object} The style value
 */
dom.css = function(element, options) {
  if (typeof options === 'string') {
    return getStyle(element, options);
  } else {
    for (var property in options) {
      if (options.hasOwnProperty(property)) {
        setStyle(element, property, options[property]);
      }
    }
  }
};
{% endhighlight %}

Next, <code>setStyle</code>'s implementation is dependent on browser:

{% highlight javascript %}
if (document.documentElement.currentStyle) {
  getStyle = function(element, property) {
    return element.currentStyle[camelCase(property)];
  };

  setStyle = function(element, property, value) {
    return setStyleProperty(element, camelCase(property), value);
  };
} else if (document.defaultView.getComputedStyle) {
  getStyle = function(element, property) {
    return element.ownerDocument.defaultView.getComputedStyle(element, null).getPropertyValue(uncamel(property));
  };

  setStyle = function(element, property, value) {
    return setStyleProperty(element, uncamel(property), value);
  };
}
{% endhighlight %}

The <code>currentStyle</code> detection lets us determine if we should always camelCase properties or not.  Next, <Code>setStyleProperty</code> does the real work:

{% highlight javascript %}
function setStyleProperty(element, property, value) {
  if (invalidCSSNode(element)) {
    return;
  }

  if (typeof value === 'number' && !cssNumericalProperty[property]) {
    value += 'px';
  }

  element.style[property] = value;
}
{% endhighlight %}

This uses <code>cssNumericalProperty</code> which is the same as jQuery's <code>cssNumber</code> object.  I also created <code>invalidCSSNode</code> to detect if the element's style can be written to:

{% highlight javascript %}
function invalidCSSNode(element) {
  return !element || element.nodeType === nodeTypes.TEXT_NODE || element.nodeType === nodeTypes.COMMENT_NODE || !element.style;
}
{% endhighlight %}

I've used the <code>nodeTypes</code> object again to make this more readable.

h3. Conclusion

The tests pass in IE, Firefox, and Chrome/Safari, so I'm happy.  It would be possible to take reading and writing CSS properties a lot further than I have here -- colour values could be unified across browsers, and maybe even the document's stylesheets could be manipulated.

This week's code is "commit c6a2ee8":https://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js/tree/c6a2ee8b8616f0d8116c61dee29e4dc767f69df8.
