---
layout: post
title: "Node Roundup: natural, node-beatport, node-schema-org"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- node
- modules
---

h3. natural

I was recently doing some work that involved stemming.  It wasn't very fun.  Anyway, I found "natural":https://github.com/chrisumbel/natural by Chris Umbel ("License":https://github.com/chrisumbel/natural/blob/master/LICENSE.txt) which offers tools for stemming, classification, phonetics and inflection:

{% highlight javascript %}
var natural = require('natural'),
    classifier = new natural.BayesClassifier();

natural.PorterStemmer.stem('reading');
// 'read'

classifier.train(
  [{classification: 'happy', text: 'I love pizza'},
   {classification: 'happy', text: 'javascript is awesome'},
   {classification: 'sad', text: 'I hate tax'}
]);

classifier.classify('how does alex feel about pizza?');
// 'happy'
classifier.classify('how does alex feel about tax?');
// 'sad'
{% endhighlight %}

h3. node-beatport

"node-beatport":https://github.com/stagas/node-beatport is a client library for the "Beatport API":http://api.beatport.com/.  "Beatport":https://www.beatport.com is a service for buying and downloading electronic music, so the API provides a way of querying track, artist, chart or genre details.

{% highlight javascript %}
var Beatport = require('beatport')

// initialize client
var bp = Beatport()

// resources (i.e: featured/releases) as methods (camelCased, i.e: featuredReleases)
bp.releases({
  facets: [ 'genreName:Trance', 'performerName:Above&Beyond' ]
, perPage: 5
, page: 1
}, function(err, results, metadata) {
  // do something
})

bp.labelDetail({ id: 804 }, function(err, results, metadata) {
  // do something
})
{% endhighlight %}

I found it surprising that Beatport _has_ an API -- I don't think I've seen other music retailers offering this kind of service.

h3. node-schema-org

"node-schema-org":https://github.com/indexzero/node-schema-org by Charlie Robbins is a library for parsing the "microdata":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microdata_(HTML5) schemas found on "schema.org":http://schema.org/.

At the moment it will just output all of the scemas as JSON files:

{% highlight sh %}
$ npm install -g schema-org
$ read-schema-org
warn:   Removing all schemas in /usr/local/lib/node_modules/schema-org/schemas
info:   Spawning: node /usr/local/lib/node_modules/schema-org/list-schemas.js
info:   Contacting: http://schema.org/docs/full.html
{% endhighlight %}

This actually spawns lots of background jobs and totally owned my machine, so be wary of using it in its current state.
