---
layout: post
title: "Node Roundup: libuv Status, node-sql, Zipper, Jade and Stylus Updates"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- node
- modules
- css
- zip
- sql
---

<div class="intro">
You can send your node modules and articles in for review through our "contact form":/contact.html or "@dailyjs":http://twitter.com/dailyjs.
</div>

h3. libuv Status Report

Ryan Dahl posted a "status report for libuv":http://blog.nodejs.org/2011/09/23/libuv-status-report/ to the Node blog, and described some of the background to libuv and reviewed the features implemented so far.  This includes non-blocking TCP sockets (using IOCP in Windows), non-blocking named pipes, UDP, timers, child process spawning, asynchronous DNS, asynchronous file APIs, and more.  They're currently working on file system events (using inotify, kqueue, and event ports), a VT100 TTY, and socket sharing between processes. 

Ryan also linked to some interesting projects built with libuv, and this includes "Mozilla's Rust":http://www.rust-lang.org/ which is billed as a low-level concurrent language.

h3. node-sql

"node-sql":https://github.com/brianc/node-sql (npm: _sql_) by Brian Carlson (the author of "node-postgres":https://github.com/brianc/node-postgres, better known as <code>pg</code>) builds strings of SQL from a simple API.  It uses the kind of chained API that suits this kind of problem:

{% highlight javascript %}
var sql = require('sql')
  , user
  , query;

user = sql.define({
  name: 'user',
  columns: ['id', 'email', 'lastLogin']
});

query = user.select(user.id, user.email)
            .from(user)
            .where(user.lastLogin.lt(new Date()));
{% endhighlight %}

It's still a major work in progress, but I think it could lead to some extremely interesting database APIs in the future.

h3. Zipper

"Zipper":http://weblog.savanne.be/445-zipper-an-insanely-simple-zipfile-creator-for-node-js (GitHub: "rubenv / zipper":https://github.com/rubenv/zipper, npm: _zipper_, License: _BSD_) by Ruben Vermeersch is a zip file creator with an extremely easy API:

{% highlight javascript %}
var zipper = require('zipper').Zipper
  , zipfile;

zipfile = new zipper('file.zip');
zipfile.addFile('image.jpg', 'path/image.jpg', function(err) {
});
{% endhighlight %}

h3. Jade and Stylus Updates

"Jade and Stylus have been updated":http://tjholowaychuk.com/post/10695801204/jade-stylus-0-16-0-released to 0.16.0.  Jade's grammar has been extended to include literal support for <code>if</code>, <code>unless</code>, <code>while</code>, <code>until</code>, and it also supports assignment.  This means that rather than using JavaScript, it's now possible to use declarative statements:

{% highlight text %}
// Old:
- if (!(foo && bar))
 p stuff

// New:
unless foo && bar
  p stuff
{% endhighlight %}

This demonstrates the <code>unless</code> keyword, and the new Jade grammar.

The other major feature is template inheritance.  The keywords <code>extends</code> and <code>block</code> allow templates to be inherited from, and "blocks" of markup grouped together and overridden as required.

