---
layout: post
title: "Let's Make a Framework: Element Properties"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- frameworks
- tutorials
- lmaf
- documentation
- dom
---

Welcome to part 64 of _Let's Make a Framework_, the ongoing series about building a JavaScript framework.

These articles are tagged with "lmaf":http://dailyjs.com/tags.html#lmaf.  The project we're creating is called "Turing":http://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js.  Documentation is available at "turingjs.com":http://turingjs.com/.

For the past three weeks I've been looking at accessing element attributes:

* "Element Attributes":http://dailyjs.com/2011/05/05/framework-61/
* "Element Attributes Part 2":http://dailyjs.com/2011/05/12/framework-62/
* "Element Attributes Part 3":http://dailyjs.com/2011/05/19/framework-63/

When we talk about attributes we're referring to the actual HTML attributes.  These values can differ from the DOM element's _properties_.  The distinction is somewhat confusing, and many frameworks attempt to iron out the differences behind the scenes.  jQuery ended up providing access to both attributes and properties.

h3. Properties vs. Attributes

The most obvious case that demonstrates the difference between properties and values is checkboxes.  Accessing a checkbox's <code>checked</code> attribute should return <code>'checked'</code>, whereas the property will return <code>true</code>.

Perhaps that isn't completely obvious, but if you play around with this you'll see what I mean:

{% highlight html %}
<input id="check" type="checkbox" checked="checked" />
{% endhighlight %}

h3. Tests

To test if these checkboxes really behaved this way, I wrote these tests for the <code>prop</code> method:

{% highlight javascript %}
'test getting properties': function() {
  var checkbox = turing.dom.get('#checkbox')[0];

  assert.equal(turing.dom.prop(checkbox, 'checked'), true);
  assert.equal(turing('#checkbox').prop('checked'), true);
},

'test setting properties': function() {
  var checkbox = turing.dom.get('#checkbox')[0];
  
  turing.dom.prop(checkbox, 'checked', false);
  assert.equal(turing.dom.prop(checkbox, 'checked'), false);
},

'test removing properties': function() {
  var checkbox = turing.dom.get('#checkbox')[0];

  turing.dom.removeProp(checkbox, 'checked');
  assert.eqyal(turing.dom.prop(checkbox, 'checked'), undefined);
}

{% endhighlight %}

h3. Implementation

This is a basic implementation that just access an element's properties, applying <code>propertyFix</code> from the previous tutorials when required:

{% highlight javascript %}
/**
 * Get or set properties.
 *
 * @param {Object} element A DOM element
 * @param {String} attribute The property name
 * @param {String|Number|Boolean} value The property value
 */
dom.prop = function(element, property, value) {
  if (propertyFix[property])
    property = propertyFix[property];
  if (typeof value === 'undefined') {
    return element[property];
  } else {
    if (value === null) {
      return dom.removeProperty(element, property);
    } else {
      return element[property] = value;
    }
  }
};
{% endhighlight %}

And this is the corresponding DOM chain method:

{% highlight javascript %}
/**
 * Get or set a property.
 *
 * @param {String} property The property name
 * @param {String} value The property value
 * @returns {String} The property value
 */
prop: function(property, value) {
  if (this.elements.length > 0) {
    return dom.prop(this[0], property, value);
  }
},
{% endhighlight %}

It accesses the first element, if one has been found.

h3. Attribute Implementation

This will actually fail in IE:

{% highlight javascript %}
assert.equal(turing.dom.attr(checkbox, 'checked'), 'checked');
{% endhighlight %}

To get around this, we need to test to see if an attribute is a _boolean attribute_.  A boolean attribute should return its own name when it's set, which means IE's <code>getAttribute</code> code should test for this and return the expected value:

{% highlight javascript %}
booleanAttributes = {
  'selected': true,
  'readonly': true,
  'checked':  true
};

function getAttribute(element, name) {
  if (propertyFix[name]) {
    name = propertyFix[name];
  }

  if (getAttributeParamFix[name]) {
    return element.getAttribute(name, 2);
  }

  if (name === 'value' && element.nodeName === 'BUTTON') {
    return element.getAttributeNode(name).nodeValue;
  } else if (booleanAttributes[name]) {
    return element[name] ? name : undefined;
  }

  return element.getAttribute(name);
}
{% endhighlight %}

I'll have to add more <code>booleanAttributes</code> later on.

h3. Removing Properties

When I tried to remove the <code>checked</code> attribute in IE it raised an exception which said _Object doesn't support this action_.  I decided to give up and catch the exception:

{% highlight javascript %}
dom.removeProp = function(element, property) {
  if (propertyFix[property])
    property = propertyFix[property];
  try {
    element[property] = undefined;
    delete element[property];
  } catch (e) {
  }
};
{% endhighlight %}

h3. Conclusion

Property manipulation built on what we'd already achieved with attributes, but has a few browser quirks of its own to deal with.  A naive implementation can be built easily, but supporting a wide range of browsers is where the real effort comes in.

This week's code is "commit f385e09":https://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js/tree/f385e09abf087fad9a50efd83ff2f484c0ebe773.
