---
layout: post
title: "Node Roundup: Cluster, Node 0.5.9 and 0.6, French Node Blogs"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- node
- blogs
---

<div class="intro">
You can send your node modules and articles in for review through our "contact form":/contact.html or "@dailyjs":http://twitter.com/dailyjs.
</div>

h3. Node Cluster

I saw a Tweet in which Ryan Dahl mentioned this commit to Node: "introduce node cluster, 87339a2":https://github.com/joyent/node/commit/87339a22b1cc539259c02119bd7381006d56396d.  It adds a command line option to run a script using multiple processes.  The obvious criticism of this is it's possible to build this at a higher level, but I agree with Daniel Ennis' comment on the commit:

bq. While it may seem high level, I'd much rather have an officially supported method of doing it that's maintained [...]

h3. Node 0.5.9 and 0.6

"Node 0.5.9":http://blog.nodejs.org/2011/10/10/node-v0-5-9/ has been released, and "Node 0.6":https://groups.google.com/forum/#!msg/nodejs-dev/1z4PTv7fHro/8x1KtRXOcCEJ is getting close.  This means 0.6 will be the new stable branch, and Ryan recommended testing modules against 0.5.9.

bq. I apologize that it's taken so long to reach a new stable release - porting to Windows took longer than expected. In the future we will try to keep dev/stable cycles to 6 weeks.

I thought this was a very humble statement given the herculean effort that's been put into Windows support.  I'm looking forward to 0.6!

h3. More French Node Blogs

I recently featured a "French Node blog":http://www.it-wars.com/categorie8/dev in the Node Roundup, and reader Sebastien Chopin sent in two more:

* "Sebastien Chopin's Node Blog":http://www.atinux.fr -- covers topics suitable for beginners, and other JavaScript tricks
* "Nicolas Chambrier's Node Blog":http://naholyr.fr/ -- suitable for more advanced programmers

