---
layout: post
title: "Node Roundup: 6.1, Scaffoldit, Mixture"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- node
- modules
- cli
---

<div class="intro">
You can send your node modules and articles in for review through our "contact form":/contact.html or "@dailyjs":http://twitter.com/dailyjs.
</div>

h3. Node 6.1

"Node 0.6.1":http://blog.nodejs.org/2011/11/11/node-v0-6-1/ was released a few days ago, which adds improvements to documenation, "cluster":http://nodejs.org/docs/v0.6.1/api/all.html#cluster, and includes a host of bug fixes.

h3. Scaffoldit

"Scaffoldit":https://github.com/crcn/scaffoldit (npm: _scaffoldit_) by Craig Condon is a scaffolding library that makes it easy to take user input and display data using templates.  Templates can be written using mustache, and it has command-line support through Craig's "celeri":https://github.com/crcn/celeri library.

One of the examples reminds me of skeleton app generators that come with frameworks like Express:

{% highlight javascript %}
scaffoldit({
  input: {
    projectName: 'What is your project name?'
  },

  build: function(ops, next) {
    scaffoldit.fromDir(ops, '/path/to/input/dir', '/path/to/output/dir');
  },

  complete: function() {
    //...
  }
});
{% endhighlight %}

Also worth noting is Tim Caswell's "Step":https://github.com/creationix/step library is used to simplify the internal asynchronous code.

h3. Mixture

"Mixture":https://github.com/dshaw/mixture (License: _MIT_, npm: _mixture_) is a "heterogeneous cluster task manager" by Daniel Shaw.  It can be used to programmatically create a diverse set of forked tasks using a straightforward API:

{% highlight javascript %}
var mix = require('mixture').mix()
  , ioPort = 8880
  , nodeId = 0
  , i
  , workers = [];

// announce data server
mix.task('announce').fork('data.js');

// socket.io instances
var socketio = mix.task('socket.io', { filename: 'app.js' })

for (i = 0; i < count; i++) {
  ioPort++;
  nodeId++;
  workers.push(socketio.fork({ args: [ioPort, nodeId] }));
}

// At some point, workers[n].kill() could be called
{% endhighlight %}

Daniel has written an example app that uses the library, called "Stock Quote Stream":https://github.com/dshaw/mixture/tree/master/examples/stock-quotes.
