---
layout: post
title: "Let's Make a Framework: DOM Manipulation"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- frameworks
- tutorials
- lmaf
- documentation
- dom
---

Welcome to part 53 of _Let's Make a Framework_, the ongoing series about building a JavaScript framework.

If you haven't been following along, these articles are tagged with "lmaf":http://dailyjs.com/tags.html#lmaf.  The project we're creating is called "Turing":http://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js.  Documentation is available at "turingjs.com":http://turingjs.com/.

h3. The Style and innerHTML Properties

After years of blindly manipulating the <code>style</code> and <code>innerHTML</code> properties, I noticed more modern frameworks advocate against this.  If you think back to when I wrote about our animation module, you'll remember that working with style attributes can be less than user friendly -- it required a decent amount of helper methods just to do things like work with colours.  That's partially why frameworks like jQuery provide a <code>.css()</code> method -- to provide a consistent interface.

It's slightly harder to appreciate why working with <code>innerHTML</code> is bad.  It's fast, cross-browser, and easy to use.  What's not to like?  Well, it's a proprietary property.  When XHTML was all the rage, using <code>innerHTML</code> caused problems when documents were served with an XML mime-type.  It's also inconsistently implemented; IE can treat it as read-only on tables, and there are other IE-related problems too.

Hopefully I've convinced you why methods like jQuery's <code>.css</code> and <code>.html</code> are a good idea.  But how do they work?

h3. jQuery's <code>.html()</code> Implementation

You're probably wondering how exactly <code>.html()</code> works.  After all, isn't it just going to defer to <code>innerHTML</code> at some point?

The basic usage is with a string that contains HTML:

{% highlight javascript %}
$('div.demo-container')
  .html('<p>All new content.</p>');
{% endhighlight %}

It can also accept a function, but let's just consider the string case to keep things focused.

The implementation is in "manipulation.js":https://github.com/jquery/jquery/blob/master/src/manipulation.js.  Basically, <code>html</code> will use <code>innerHTML</code> if possible:

{% highlight javascript %}
if ( typeof value === "string" && !rnocache.test( value ) &&
    ( jQuery.support.leadingWhitespace || !rleadingWhitespace.test( value )) &&
      !wrapMap[ (rtagName.exec( value ) || ["", ""])[1].toLowerCase() ] ) {

value = value.replace(rxhtmlTag, "<$1></$2>");

try {
  for ( var i = 0, l = this.length; i < l; i++ ) {
    // Remove element nodes and prevent memory leaks
    if ( this[i].nodeType === 1 ) {
      jQuery.cleanData( this[i].getElementsByTagName("*") );
      this[i].innerHTML = value;
    }
  }
} catch(e) {
  // If using innerHTML throws an exception, use the fallback method
  this.empty().append( value );
}
{% endhighlight %}

The first two lines are the most confusing part of this code.  Let's look at each part in sequence:

* <code>jQuery.support.leadingWhitespace</code> is set to true in browsers that preserve whitespace when inserting content with <code>innerHTML</code>
* <code>rleadingWhitespace.test(value)</code> checks to see if the HTML fragment has leading whitespace
* <code>wrapMap</code> is an object that in this case helps look for tags that can't be inserted normally
* <code>rxhtmlTag</code> is a regex that expands self-closing tags
* A loop removes each existing Node to prevent memory leaks
* If <code>innerHTML</code> raises an exception, fall back to <code>append</code>

If the value is a string, and the whitespace/<code>wrapMap</code> expressions return <code>true</code>, then inserting with <code>innerHTML</code> might be possible.  Else use <code>append</code>. 

h3. <code>wrapMap</code>

I'll need to explain <code>append</code> separately, but first let's look at <code>wrapMap</code>:

{% highlight javascript %}
wrapMap = {
  option: [ 1, "<select multiple='multiple'>", "</select>" ],
  legend: [ 1, "<fieldset>", "</fieldset>" ],
  thead: [ 1, "<table>", "</table>" ],
  tr: [ 2, "<table><tbody>", "</tbody></table>" ],
  td: [ 3, "<table><tbody><tr>", "</tr></tbody></table>" ],
  col: [ 2, "<table><tbody></tbody><colgroup>", "</colgroup></table>" ],
  area: [ 1, "<map>", "</map>" ],
  _default: [ 0, "", "" ]
};

wrapMap.optgroup = wrapMap.option;
wrapMap.tbody = wrapMap.tfoot = wrapMap.colgroup = wrapMap.caption = wrapMap.thead;
wrapMap.th = wrapMap.td;

// IE can't serialize <link> and <script> tags normally
if ( !jQuery.support.htmlSerialize ) {
  wrapMap._default = [ 1, "div<div>", "</div>" ];
}
{% endhighlight %}

Running it returns responses like this:

{% highlight javascript %}
'<tr><td>Example</td></tr>'
> !wrapMap[ (rtagName.exec( value ) || ["", ""])[1].toLowerCase() ] 
false

'<div><p>Example content</p></div>'
> !wrapMap[ (rtagName.exec( value ) || ["", ""])[1].toLowerCase() ] 
true
{% endhighlight %}

h3. <code>append</code>

In jQuery, <code>append</code> and many other methods rely on <code>domManip</code>.  This method accepts a list of elements to create and insert, a confusing <code>table</code> argument, and a callback.  The callback is used to actually manipulate the DOM.  In the case of <code>append</code> it looks like this:

{% highlight javascript %}
function( elem ) {
  if (this.nodeType === 1) {
    this.appendChild(elem);
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

The "nodeType":https://developer.mozilla.org/en/nodeType is checked to ensure it's an element node, then "appendChild":https://developer.mozilla.org/En/DOM/Node.appendChild is used to insert the content.

h3. <code>domManip</code>

The <code>append</code> method is simple because <code>domManip</code> does the real work.  Let's take a high-level look (I've added some extra comments):

{% highlight javascript %}
domManip: function( args, table, callback ) {
  var results, first, fragment, parent,
    value = args[0],
    scripts = [];

  // We can't cloneNode fragments that contain checked, in WebKit
  if ( !jQuery.support.checkClone && arguments.length === 3 && typeof value === "string" && rchecked.test( value ) ) {
    // run domManip on each element, but parse the element with jQuery() first
  }

  // If there's already an element
  if ( this[0] ) {
    parent = value && value.parentNode;

    // If we're in a fragment, just use that instead of building a new one
    if ( jQuery.support.parentNode && parent && parent.nodeType === 11 && parent.childNodes.length === this.length ) {
      results = { fragment: parent };

    } else {
      results = jQuery.buildFragment( args, this, scripts );
    }

    fragment = results.fragment;

    if ( fragment.childNodes.length === 1 ) {
      first = fragment = fragment.firstChild;
    } else {
      first = fragment.firstChild;
    }

    if ( first ) {
      table = table && jQuery.nodeName( first, "tr" );

      // Call the callback with each element
      for ( var i = 0, l = this.length, lastIndex = l - 1; i < l; i++ ) {
        callback.call(
          table ?
            root(this[i], first) :
            this[i],
          // Make sure that we do not leak memory by inadvertently discarding
          // the original fragment (which might have attached data) instead of
          // using it; in addition, use the original fragment object for the last
          // item instead of first because it can end up being emptied incorrectly
          // in certain situations (Bug #8070).
          // Fragments from the fragment cache must always be cloned and never used
          // in place.
          results.cacheable || (l > 1 && i < lastIndex) ?
            jQuery.clone( fragment, true, true ) :
            fragment
        );
      }
    }

    if ( scripts.length ) {
      jQuery.each( scripts, evalScript );
    }
  }

  return this;
}
{% endhighlight %}

As you might have noticed, <code>jQuery.buildFragment</code> seems to be doing something important here.  The reality is that <code>buildFragment</code> manages caching and hands off the real work to <code>jQuery.clean</code>.

h3. <code>jQuery.clean</code>

Bored yet?  We're nearly at the best part!

The middle of <code>jQuery.clean</code> has the magic we've been searching for:

{% highlight javascript %}
if ( typeof elem === "string" && !rhtml.test( elem ) ) {
  elem = context.createTextNode( elem );

} else if ( typeof elem === "string" ) {
  // Fix "XHTML"-style tags in all browsers
  elem = elem.replace(rxhtmlTag, "<$1></$2>");

  // Trim whitespace, otherwise indexOf won't work as expected
  var tag = (rtagName.exec( elem ) || ["", ""])[1].toLowerCase(),
    wrap = wrapMap[ tag ] || wrapMap._default,
    depth = wrap[0],
    div = context.createElement("div");

  // Go to html and back, then peel off extra wrappers
  div.innerHTML = wrap[1] + elem + wrap[2];

  // Move to the right depth
  while ( depth-- ) {
    div = div.lastChild;
  }

  // Remove IE's autoinserted <tbody> from table fragments
  if ( !jQuery.support.tbody ) {
{% endhighlight %}

If the element is a string and doesn't have any tags, it's a text node.  Otherwise, expand self-closing tags, trim whitespace, create a shim div to extract some delicious DOM nodes, then handle IE's table weirdness.

h3. Conclusion

Explaining how jQuery implements <code>html</code> demonstrates just how much work is required to provide a consistent API for accessing <code>innerHTML</code>.  However, implementing this stack of functionality makes many interesting DOM manipulation possible, beyond <code>append</code>.

Incidentally, if you want to see code that does this without dealing with as many browser headaches, try looking at "Zepto's source":http://zeptojs.com/.  Zepto only targets WebKit, which means it's a great way to learn the fundamental techniques without worrying about legacy IE issues.

Next week I'll explain how <code>css</code> works.

h3. References

* "jQuery manipulation.js":https://github.com/jquery/jquery/blob/master/src/manipulation.js
* "Node.nodeType":https://developer.mozilla.org/en/nodeType
* "Node.appendChild":https://developer.mozilla.org/En/DOM/Node.appendChild
* "Zepto":http://zeptojs.com/
