---
layout: post
title: "Let's Make a Framework: npm"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- frameworks
- tutorials
- lmaf
- npm
---

<div class="intro">
_Let's Make a Framework_ is an ongoing series about building a JavaScript framework from the ground up.

These articles are tagged with "lmaf":http://dailyjs.com/tags.html#lmaf.  The project we're creating is called "Turing":http://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js.  Documentation is available at "turingjs.com":http://turingjs.com/.
</div>

There's no reason why you can't distribute your client-side JavaScript using npm!  In this tutorial I'll look at adapting parts of Turing to work using the popular package manager.

h3. Installation 

Distributing packages with npm is extremely easy.  This is partly due to the fact that npm itself is very simple, but it's also because npm has great documentation.

If you don't already have npm, the basic installation is just:

{% highlight text %}
curl http://npmjs.org/install.sh | sh
{% endhighlight %}

There's more information in the "npm readme":https://github.com/isaacs/npm#readme.

h3. Registry Account Creation

A registry user account is required to distribute npm packages.  Use <code>man npm-adduser</code> to read how this works.  If you've forgotten your password, npm now has a password reset page at "admin.npmjs.org":http://admin.npmjs.org/.

h3. <code>package.json</code>

Once you've got an account, you'll need to create a <code>package.json</code> file.  You don't really need a tool to do this; it's pretty trivial as long as you write well-formed JSON.  Like most people I usually forget what various supported options are, so I usually check <code>man npm-json</code> to make sure I've got everything I want set up.

When working on most Node projects, I'll have a <code>dependencies</code> property, but this project doesn't really have any.  We do have some development dependencies though, so these can be put into the <code>devDependencies</code> property.  This is preferable to <code>dependencies</code> because people who just want to _use_ your module don't usually want to build or test it.

This is what the Turing <code>package.json</code> file looks like:

{% highlight javascript %}
{ "name": "turing"
, "description": "A library for enumeration, functional programming, promises, and more"
, "version": "0.0.73"
, "url": "http://turingjs.com/"
, "author": "Alex R. Young <alex@helicoid.net>"
, "engines": ["node >= 0.4.0"]
, "main": "./lib/index.js"
, "devDependencies": {
    "dox": "latest"
  , "jake": "latest"
  }
, "repository": {
    "type" : "git"
  , "url" : "https://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js.git"
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

h3. Adapting Turing's Modules

In the browser Turing uses a global to stitch various modules together.  This was done so it can be safely split into self-contained modules.  However, this pattern makes adapting it to a CommonJS module slightly awkward.

As an example, consider Turing's enumerable module and <code>turing.init</code>.  The <code>init</code> method is from the Core module, and allows us to extend the behaviour of <code>turing()</code>.  That means we get jQuery-like polymorphic initialization:

{% highlight javascript %}
turing([1, 2, 3]).map(function(i) { return i * 10; }).values();
{% endhighlight %}

Great!  But that means the enumerable looks for <code>turing.init</code>.  We can't share globals in the same way using CommonJS modules.  That means the anonymous function wrapper isn't quite enough.

This old pattern worked well in the browser, but doesn't suit CommonJS without modification:

{% highlight javascript %}
(function() {
  turing.myModule = {
    // Methods
  };
})();
{% endhighlight %}

What we need is a way of passing <code>turing</code> after it's instantiated in <code>turing.core.js</code>.  That gives rise to this pattern:

{% highlight javascript %}
(function() {
  function myModule(global) {
    global.myModule = {
      // Methods
    };
  }

  if (typeof module !== 'undefined') {
    // For Node
    module.exports = function(t) {
      return EnumerableModule(t);
    }
  } else {
    EnumerableModule(turing);
  }
})();
{% endhighlight %}

Now, in the <code>lib/index.js</code> mentioned by the example <code>package.json</code>:

{% highlight javascript %}
var turing = require(__dirname + '/../turing.core.js').turing;
require(__dirname + '/../turing.promise.js')(turing);
require(__dirname + '/../turing.enumerable.js')(turing);
module.exports = turing;
{% endhighlight %}

Now Turing can be loaded using Node:

{% highlight javascript %}
var t = require('turing');

t([1, 2, 3]).map(function(i) { return i * 10; }).values();
{% endhighlight %}

Further iterations could make it load certain modules on demand.  Ideally people should be able to do this:

{% highlight javascript %}
var lessCommonModule = require('turing').lessCommonModule;
lessCommonModule.doSomething();
{% endhighlight %}

h3. Testing

I actually wrote a small unit test for this in <code>test/index.test.js</code>:

{% highlight javascript %}
var assert = require('assert')
  , turing = require(__dirname + '/../lib/index.js');

assert.ok(turing.Promise);

var sum = 0;
turing.enumerable.each([1, 2, 3], function(i) {
  sum += i;
});
assert.equal(6, sum);
{% endhighlight %}

It just makes sure everything gets loaded as expected.

Another way to test your npm modules is to use <code>npm link</code>.  This links your package system-wide, so it behaves as if it's been installed.  This is useful for loading your modules in the Node REPL, or testing binary scripts that you might distribute alongside your package.

h3. Publishing

Once you're done with all that, run <code>npm publish</code> and your code will be available for distribution through npm.

h3. Conclusion

Check all of this out in "commit a54f32":https://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js/blob/a54f3273af5498692eeff66a2ca7c912510623c8.  And, if you've ever wanted to create a project website using GitHub, I've already got you covered in "Part 48: Project Websites":http://dailyjs.com/2011/01/27/framework-part-48/.


