---
layout: post
title: "Let's Make a Framework: Promises Part 4"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- frameworks
- tutorials
- lmaf
- documentation
- promises
---

<div class="intro">
_Let's Make a Framework_ is an ongoing series about building a JavaScript framework from the ground up.

These articles are tagged with "lmaf":http://dailyjs.com/tags.html#lmaf.  The project we're creating is called "Turing":http://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js.  Documentation is available at "turingjs.com":http://turingjs.com/.
</div>

Over the last three weeks I've been looking at how web frameworks implement promises, and I've built a <code>Promise</code> class along the way.

* "Promises: Part 1":http://dailyjs.com/2011/06/02/framework-65/
* "Promises: Part 2":http://dailyjs.com/2011/06/09/framework-66/
* "Promises: Part 3":http://dailyjs.com/2011/06/16/framework-67/

h3. Ajax Integration

After researching promises, jQuery's API stood out as a solid example of using them to do common tasks.  In particular, <code>jQuery.ajax</code> is _Deferred-compatible_, which means it transparently provides promise-related methods:

{% highlight javascript %}
$.get('/example').then(
  function() { alert('Success'); },
  function() { alert('Failure'); }
);
{% endhighlight %}

We should be able to recreate this with our <code>turing.Promise</code> class, even though it's extremely simple.  There are a few things to keep in mind:

* When implementing functions that support <code>turing.Promise</code>, they should return an object with a method that has the same signature as <code>then(success, failure)</code>
* I designed Turing to be modular, so <code>turing.Promise</code> may not be available
* The callee will return a promise that can be set with success/failure functions that are subsequently run later inside the original callee.  It's not as mind-bending as it sounds!

h3. Tests

I wrote a little Express app to test <code>turing.net</code>.  I've updated it to work with Express 2.x.  This should provide a useful test for promises:

{% highlight javascript %}
'test promises': function() {
  $t.get('/get-test').then(
    function(r) { assert.equal('{"key":"value"}', r.responseText); },
    function(r) { assert.ok(false); }
  );
}
{% endhighlight %}

The value in the assertion, <code>'{"key":"value"}'</code>, is just something I set the Express app to return.  These tests can be run by changing directory to <code>test/functional</code> then running <code>node ajax.js</code> and visiting <code>http://localhost:3000</code>.

h3. Implementation

The beginning of the net module's internal <code>ajax</code> function needs to be changed to instantiate a <code>Promise</code> if it's available:

{% highlight javascript %}
function ajax(url, options) {
  var request = xhr(),
      promise;
      
  if (turing.Promise) {
    promise = new turing.Promise();
  }
{% endhighlight %}

Now we've got one, what do we do with it?  Well, we need to make it accessible to the outside by changing whatever <code>ajax()</code> returns to include a <code>then</code> method.  This is the bare minimum.

This function returns an <code>XMLHttpRequest<code> object (or IE's various equivalents).  I just added a <code>then</code> method to this, but it would probably be better to return something else and keep the request object around internally.

{% highlight javascript %}
request.then = function() {
  if (promise) promise.then.apply(promise, arguments);
};
{% endhighlight %}

I made <code>then</code> just defer to the current promise object, and used <code>apply</code> to call it with <code>arguments</code>.  If any beginners find this puzzling, give "arguments":https://developer.mozilla.org/en/JavaScript/Reference/functions_and_function_scope/arguments and "apply":https://developer.mozilla.org/en/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Function/apply a read on MDN.  These language features are extremely useful for making flexible APIs.

The final thing to do is actually call the success or failure functions set up by <code>then</code>.  They just need to go where the original callbacks get executed.  Recall that our <code>Promise</code> class uses <code>resolve(value)</code> and <code>reject(value)</code> to handle the resolution of a promise:

{% highlight javascript %}
  function respondToReadyState(readyState) {
    if (request.readyState == 4) {
      if (request.getResponseHeader('content-type') === 'application/json')
        request.responseJSON = net.parseJSON(request.responseText);

      if (successfulRequest(request)) {
        if (options.success) options.success(request);

        // HERE:
        if (promise) promise.resolve(request);
      } else {
        if (options.error) options.error(request);

        // HERE:
        if (promise) promise.reject(request);
      }
    }
  }
{% endhighlight %}

h3. Conclusion

That wasn't too painful, was it?  I think there may be a good argument for making <code>Promise</code> part of Turing's core module, particularly as it's so short and useful.  By following this example, promises could be used throughout the framework to enhance the API.

The latest code update was "commit 0d0bfac":https://github.com/alexyoung/turing.js/tree/0d0bfacec4dbcb1a9a4bba46a1ab15ac51784fba.
