---
layout: post
title: "DailyJS is Looking for Writers"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- community
- news
---

Over the last three years I've written over 700 articles for DailyJS.  I've written through national holidays, trips to Europe and Asia, and I've enjoyed every minute of it!  The time has come, however, to look for more writers.  In September I'm going to become a father, and naturally family obligations will take priority for a few weeks.

Rather than leave readers without their daily dose of JavaScript news and tutorials, I'm looking for writers to contribute to the site.  If you're an open source developer and would like to promote your latest Node module or client-side library by writing a tutorial: this is your chance!  I'm also interested in hearing from developers of commercial services that are relevant to JavaScript developers.

Before writing anything, [fill out this form to get in touch](https://docs.google.com/a/alexyoung.org/spreadsheet/viewform?formkey=dHBBV0hFem5IOG1qYmNOQjdoNW1CY3c6MQ).  I'll let you know if your suggestion is appropriate for the site.

###Writing Guide

* Articles do not need to be long -- three to five paragraphs is great, otherwise consider writing a series of articles
* Markdown is fine, although we use weird tags for code samples -- [here is an example post](https://github.com/alexyoung/dailyjs/blob/master/_posts/2012-08-09-mvstar-5.md)
* British or American English is acceptable
* DailyJS reserves the right to edit your article before publishing it

###Payment

Articles will be paid for at a base rate of $25.  Payment terms are negotiable, and may be subject to exchange rate conversion.

[Submit your article idea here](https://docs.google.com/a/alexyoung.org/spreadsheet/viewform?formkey=dHBBV0hFem5IOG1qYmNOQjdoNW1CY3c6MQ).
