---
layout: post
title: "Backbone.js: Hacker's Guide Part 2"
author: Alex Young
categories: 
- mvc
- tutorials
- backbone.js
- code-review
---

[Last week](/2012/07/19/mvstar-2/) we looked at Backbone.js's internals, covering configuration, server support, events, and models.  I actually really enjoy looking at projects this way, it's one of the best ways to learn new programming techniques.  So let's continue dissecting Backbone by taking a look at `Backbone.Collection`.

###Constructor

[Backbone.Collection](https://github.com/documentcloud/backbone/blob/ddefd21167c27d98fd1eb05a44e330a2313055f6/backbone.js#L549) is a constructor function that accepts an array of models and an options object.

As an aside, notice that [void 0](https://github.com/documentcloud/backbone/blob/ddefd21167c27d98fd1eb05a44e330a2313055f6/backbone.js#L558) is used in this code.  To understand why, recall that [the void operator](https://developer.mozilla.org/en/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/void) returns `undefined`.  Since ECMAScript 5, the `undefined` property isn't writable, so it's safe to use it.  However, in earlier versions it was writable, which meant malicious code could technically take advantage of this fact by assigning a value to the `undefined` property of the _global object_.  The `void` operator expects an expression, so `void 0` is considered the idiomatic way of safely obtaining `undefined`.

The constructor calls the [reset](https://github.com/documentcloud/backbone/blob/ddefd21167c27d98fd1eb05a44e330a2313055f6/backbone.js#L558) method, which removes existing models and adds new ones.  This is similar to instantiating a collection with no models, and then manually calling `add` on each one.

###Inheritance and Mixins

The [Collection class inherits from Backbone.Events](https://github.com/documentcloud/backbone/blob/ddefd21167c27d98fd1eb05a44e330a2313055f6/backbone.js#L565).  Events are used both publicly and internally.  There's a [toJSON](https://github.com/documentcloud/backbone/blob/ddefd21167c27d98fd1eb05a44e330a2313055f6/backbone.js#L577) method that iterates over each model and calls the model's `toJSON` method.  This brings up an interesting point: collections use methods from Underscore.js, but `Collection` doesn't inherit from Underscore.  Why not?  Well, [certain methods are manually assigned to Collection.prototype](https://github.com/documentcloud/backbone/blob/ddefd21167c27d98fd1eb05a44e330a2313055f6/backbone.js#L863-875), while others are rewritten in ways that make sense in Backbone.  For example, the [pluck](https://github.com/documentcloud/backbone/blob/ddefd21167c27d98fd1eb05a44e330a2313055f6/backbone.js#L748) method works on model attributes, and [sort](https://github.com/documentcloud/backbone/blob/ddefd21167c27d98fd1eb05a44e330a2313055f6/backbone.js#L734) uses the `boundComparator` which has a slightly different API to `Array.prototype.sort`.

###Adding and Removing Items

Collections are basically an array of models with events, wrapped with convenient Underscore-like iterator methods.  The `add` method is always called however models are added, which means it's a good place to do housekeeping like [preventing invalid models and duplicates](https://github.com/documentcloud/backbone/blob/ddefd21167c27d98fd1eb05a44e330a2313055f6/backbone.js#L595-612) from being inserted into the collection.  Models are also [indexed by id](https://github.com/documentcloud/backbone/blob/ddefd21167c27d98fd1eb05a44e330a2313055f6/backbone.js#L616-620), and all model events are bound to [\_onModelEvent](https://github.com/documentcloud/backbone/blob/ddefd21167c27d98fd1eb05a44e330a2313055f6/backbone.js#L851).  This method dynamically adds new models, removes deleted ones, and updates models with changes.

If the collection requires sorting, the `add` method will [call sort](https://github.com/documentcloud/backbone/blob/ddefd21167c27d98fd1eb05a44e330a2313055f6/backbone.js#L636) once all models have been processed.  And, if the `silent` option isn't set, an `add` event will be triggered for each model that was successfully added.

It naturally follows that the [remove](https://github.com/documentcloud/backbone/blob/ddefd21167c27d98fd1eb05a44e330a2313055f6/backbone.js#L650) method has a fair amount of work to do, given the complexity of `add`.  The indexed ids must be deleted, and [\_removeReference](https://github.com/documentcloud/backbone/blob/ddefd21167c27d98fd1eb05a44e330a2313055f6/backbone.js#L842) is called to remove the model's reference back to the collection.

Deleting items in JavaScript is interesting, because we actually have the `delete` keyword to do this for us.  However, `delete` is only used for properties, so the authors have used the `Array.prototype.splice` technique to delete models from the array.  The `add` and `remove` methods also update the `length` property, which allows the collection to behave in an Array-like manner, and helps support the mixed-in Underscore methods.

Now take a look at the simplicity of the [where](https://github.com/documentcloud/backbone/blob/ddefd21167c27d98fd1eb05a44e330a2313055f6/backbone.js#L721) method.  It basically loops over each model, comparing an attributes object.  This is simple because the `filter` method is taken directly from Underscore.

###Chainable API

Another bit of sugar is the support for Underscore's [chain](https://github.com/documentcloud/backbone/blob/ddefd21167c27d98fd1eb05a44e330a2313055f6/backbone.js#L816) method.  This works by calling the original method with the current array of models and returning the result.   In case you haven't seen it before, the chainable API looks like this:

{% highlight javascript %}
var collection = new Backbone.Collection([
  { name: 'Tim', age: 5 },
  { name: 'Ida', age: 26 },
  { name: 'Rob', age: 55 }
]);

collection.chain()
  .filter(function(item) { return item.get('age') > 10; })
  .map(function(item) { return item.get('name'); })
  .value();

// Will return ['Ida', 'Rob']
{% endhighlight %}

Some of the Backbone-specific method will return `this`, which means they can be chained as well:

{% highlight javascript %}
var collection = new Backbone.Collection();

collection
    .add({ name: 'John', age: 23 })
    .add({ name: 'Harry', age: 33 })
    .add({ name: 'Steve', age: 41 });

collection.pluck('name');
// ['John', 'Harry', 'Steve']
{% endhighlight %}

###Conclusion

I've been using Backbone for a while, and I've never really thought about how the `Backbone.Collection` methods can be chained.  Sometimes it's difficult to tell what's possible though -- once you're in an Underscore chain you can't use methods like `pluck` because Backbone's models use the `get` method to access attributes, so you'll end up with an array of `undefined` values.

Next week I'll continue looking at Backbone by investing the formidable routing and history APIs.
